1

Strasbourg, 10 January 2012

MIN-LANG/PR (2012) 2

EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY LANGUAGES

Second periodical report
presented to the Secretary General of the Council of Europe
in accordance with Article 15 of the Charter

UKRAINE

2

SECOND PERIODIC REPORT OF UKRAINE ON IMPLEMENTATION OF
THE EUROPEAN CHARTER FOR REGIONAL OR MINORITY
LANGUAGES
Preamble
Part I
Demographics and revision of state policy, legislation and practical measures
provided for the development of regional or minority languages
As of September 1, 2011 Ukraine had a population of 45, 668, 082 people. Thus,
since September 1, 2007, when the number of people accounted for 46, 460, 251, the
population of Ukraine has decreased by 1 million people, namely, by 792,169 of its
citizens. Since the All-Ukrainian census of the population of 2011 was postponed, the
Report uses the data on the national composition of the population and the number of
people who speak certain languages referring to the All-Ukrainian census of the
population of 2001.
The European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages (hereinafter – Charter)
was
signed
by
Ukraine on May 2, 1996 and ratified by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine on May 15,
2003 (Law of Ukraine of 15.15.2003 # 802-IV “On Ratification of European Charter
for Regional or Minority Languages”).
In accordance with article 2 of the Law —On Ratification of the European Charter
For Regional Or Minority Languages“, in Ukraine the provisions of the Charter apply
to the languages of the following national minorities: Belarusian, Bulgarian,
Gagauzian, Greek, Jewish, Crimean Tatar, Moldovan, German, Polish, Russian,
Romanian, Slovak and Hungarian.
The system of usage of the languages is regulated by a number of legislative acts,
namely, by Laws of Ukraine “On Languages in Ukrainian SSR”, “On Citizenship of
Ukraine”, “On Association of Citizens”, “On Education”, “On Printed Mass Media
(Press) in Ukraine”, “On Culture”. The legal foundation for such regulatory and legal
acts is the Constitution of Ukraine, Declaration of State Sovereignty of Ukraine,
Declaration of Independence of Ukraine, Declaration of the Rights of Nationalities of
Ukraine, by the Laws of Ukraine “On National Minorities in Ukraine”, “On Local
Self-Government in Ukraine”, “On Freedom of Conscience and Religious
Organizations in Ukraine”, by the Civil Code of Ukraine, by the Code of
Administrative Proceedings of Ukraine, by the Civil Procedural Code of Ukraine, by
the Family Code of Ukraine, by the Criminal Procedural Code of Ukraine, by the
Law of Ukraine “On Television and Radio Broadcasting” and by other legislative
acts.
According to The Constitution of Ukraine, international treaties that are in force,
agreed to be binding by the Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, are part of the national
legislation of Ukraine. The Law of Ukraine “On International Agreements of
Ukraine” sets that if an international treaty of Ukraine which properly entered into

3

force envisages rules other than those set by the relevant act of Ukrainian legislation,
the rules of that international treaty shall apply (article 19 of the Law).
With the aim of the implementation of the provisions of the Charter, the Ukrainian
bodies of power elaborated a number of activities, aimed at the research and
consideration of public opinion as a whole and the opinion of national minorities of
Ukraine in particular.
Pursuant to article 15 of the Charter, Ukraine drew up The First Periodic Report
on the realization of the Charter and presented it to the Council of Europe on August
2, 2007.
The representatives of the Committee of Experts of the Council of Europe arrived
in Ukraine on a working visit on May 8, 2008. They held a number of meetings with
authorities of Ukraine in charge of the implementation of the Charter. At the
meetings the representatives of Ukraine informed the representatives of the
Committee of Experts about the process of the realization of the responsibilities taken
by Ukraine in accordance with the Charter.
The Committee also held a number of meetings with the speakers of the
Belarusian, Bulgarian, Gagauzian, Modern Greek, Jewish, Crimean Tatar, Moldovan,
German, Polish, Russian, Romanian, Slovak, Hungarian, Romani, Karaite and
Krimchak languages.
Based on the results of the examination of The First Periodic Report by the
Committee of Minsters of the Council of Europe, the Committee of Experts of the
Council of Europe prepared the Report on the implementation of the Charter and the
recommendations of the Committee of Ministers of the Council of Europe for the
implementation of the Charter by Ukraine. The Report of the Committee Experts of
the Council of Europe also contained comments and reservations of the Committee
Experts of the Council of Europe about the implementation of the Charter for
Regional and Minority Languages by Ukraine. The Report of the Committee Experts
of the Council of Europe also contained Questions submitted to the Government of
Ukraine to be included into the Second Periodic Report.
Pursuant to article 15 of the Charter the Second Periodic Report was to have been
presented to the Council of Europe in June 2011. However, on the request of the
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine the presentation of the Report was postponed, since
following the Administrative Reform carried out in Ukraine in December 2010, State
Committee on Nationalities and Religions of Ukraine – the central executive body in
charge of monitoring, implementation of the provisions of the Charter and
preparation of the Second Periodic Report – was liquidated. Consequently, its
authority was delegated to the Ministry of Culture of Ukraine.
The Report prepared by the Ministry of Culture of Ukraine is based on the
information-analytical data submitted by the state regional administrations, central
executive bodies and national minority organizations. The Report consists of 3 parts.
For the years of its independence, Ukraine has created legal framework for
education and created regulatory and legal framework for the development of
education system. Education in Ukraine is grounded upon the principles of

4

humanism, democracy, national consciousness and mutual respect between nations
and states.
According to the Constitution of Ukraine every citizen of Ukraine has the right to
free education in all state and communal education establishments, irrespective of
race, nationality, origin, property status, sex, political or religious beliefs, health and
place of residence.
The political and legal basis for promoting the right to education for national
minorities is grounded upon the Constitution of Ukraine, Declaration of State
Sovereignty of Ukraine, laws of Ukraine “On National Minorities in Ukraine”, “On
Languages in Ukrainian SSR”, “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or
Minority Languages”, “On Ratification of Framework Convention On Protection of
National Minorities”, “On Education”, “On Pre-School Education”, “On General
Secondary Education”, “On Extracurricular Education”, “On Vocational Education”,
“On Higher Education” and other legal acts of Ukraine.
National legislation along with the regulation of ethno-national factors in
education are developed in accordance with international rules and recommendations
set forth in The Universal Declaration of Human Rights, Framework Convention For
the Protection of National Minorities, European Charter for Regional or minority
languages, The Hague Recommendations Regarding the Education Rights of
National Minorities – High Commissioner on National Minorities and other legal
documents.
Part 2
Application of General Provisions of Part II of the Charter
Subparagraph a), Paragraph 1, Article 7 of the Charter
On December 14, 2010 The Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine adopted the Law of
Ukraine “On culture” (Law of Ukraine 2778-VI). Pursuant to Article 3 of the Law,
the main principles of the state policy towards culture are:
- Recognition of culture as one of the main factors of the originality of the
Ukrainian people – the citizens of Ukraine of all nationalities (hereafter – the
Ukrainian people);
- Promotion of the unique cultural area in Ukraine, preservation of cultural
integrity;
- Protection and preservation of cultural heritage as a base of national culture,
development of culture;
- Assistance in strengthening humanistic ideas, ethnical principles in social life;
- Promotion of human rights in culture;
- Creation of important conditions for the creative development of a personality,
promotion of cultural standards, aesthetic upbringing, acceptability of cultural
education for children and youth, satisfaction of cultural needs of the
Ukrainian people, development of culture institutions irrespective of property

5

category, attraction of investments into cultural sphere, funding culture from
fee-based services, charities and other lawful financial resources.
- Promotion of creative unions and public organizations, promotion of language
usage in the cultural sphere of Ukraine, access to the benefits of culture for the
citizens;
- Support for the domestic producer in the cultural sphere;
- Development of international cultural cooperation;
Article 4 of the Law sets that the State shall primarily create the conditions for the
development of culture for the Ukrainian nation, indigenous people and national
minorities of Ukraine;
Article 5 of the Law determines language usage in the cultural sphere:
1. Language usage in the cultural sphere is guaranteed by the Constitution of
Ukraine and determined by the laws of Ukraine on languages.
2. The State provides overall development and functioning of the state
language in the cultural sphere. It guarantees free usage of languages of all
the national minorities in Ukraine.
Article 6 of the Law guarantees that the citizens of Ukraine have the right to associate
in creative unions, national cultural associations, centres, funds and other public
organizations in the sphere of culture. The law also guarantees the right to
preservation, development and promotion of culture, language uniqueness, traditions,
customs and ceremonies.
Article 10 of the Law determines the rights of the citizens of all nationalities of
Ukraine:
1. The State creates conditions for the cultural development of the citizens of all
nationalities of Ukraine, assists in involving citizens in creating cultural
valuables.
2. The citizens of Ukraine of any nationality have the right to create, preserve,
safeguard, use and popularize the national cultural heritage, language,
traditions, customs and ceremonies. They also have the right to associate in
national creative unions, centres and cultural institutions. The citizens have the
right to carry out any lawful activity in the sphere of culture.
Article 16 of the Law obliges the bodies of executive power and local governments to
provide preservation of intangible cultural heritage as well as national traditional
culture, languages, dialects and accents, folklore, traditions, customs and ceremonies,
national art crafts, handicrafts, historical toponyms, etc.
Subparagraph b), Paragraph 1, Article 7 of the Charter

6

For recent years there have been a number of debates over the ways and directions of
the Administrative Reform to be carried out. In spite of a sufficient number of draft
papers on the Administrative Reform, none of them has been realized so far.
The concept of the administrative-territorial reform, drafted in 2005, does not
envisage creating the districts with a predominant number of representatives of
national and language minorities, which would enable to take more measures to
support regional languages.
Thus as of today administrative and territorial division of Ukraine is unchanged. The
administrative-territorial system of Ukraine consists of the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea, regions, districts, cities, municipal districts, settlements and villages. Ukraine
incorporates the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, Vinnytsya, Volyn,
Dnipropetrovsk, Donetsk, Zhytomyr, Zakarpatya, Zaporizhya, Ivano-Frankivsk,
Kyiv, Kirovohrad, Luhansk, Lviv, Mykolaiv, Odessa, Poltava, Rivne, Sumy,
Ternopil, Kharkiv, Kherson, Khmelnytsk, Cherkasy, Chernivtsi, Chernihiv regions,
cities of Kyiv and Sevastopol.
It’s important to emphasize that due to urbanization and intensive assimilative and
migratory processes that occurred in Ukraine in the XX century as a result of the
totalitarian national and language policy of the USSR, it is often impossible to
determine the exact geographical area where the speakers of a certain language live.
Consequently, the Russian language almost supplanted the Ukrainian language in the
political, administrative, scientific, economic and artistic spheres of life. The Russian
language limited the usage of the Ukrainian one in an informal and personal
communication. In fact, the Ukrainian language was forced out of big cities and was
partially spoken in villages, settlements and the regions of the Western Ukraine.
Another distinctive feature of those times was age distribution, that is, aged people
spoke their native Ukrainian language, while younger generation (children and
grandchildren) refused to speak Ukrainian and preferred the Russian language, which
was the result of the totalitarian assimilative policy of the USSR.
The fact, that the Russian language was an instrument of assimilation of other
nationalities of the USSR in the process of the creation of the unified soviet nation,
makes the state bodies more prudently tackle the issue of an optimal choice between
the policies of the revival of the national language, its overall usage in all the spheres
of social life and the measures to support the Russian language as the language of the
biggest national minority. Hereby, it’s important to take into consideration the fact,
that the Ukrainian language was not the only one to be forced out of the usage, but
also a number of other languages of national minorities in Ukraine were displaced,
which is convincingly confirmed by the All-Ukrainian census of population of 2001.
The aforementioned facts let us claim, that the complete implementation of the
Charter, that is, without considering abovementioned issues, may preserve the
implications of the totalitarian assimilative language policy of the USSR, preserve the
sources of implicit social tension, geographical areas of which is difficult to

7

determine and consequently make it impossible to fully revive both the Ukrainian
language (as a State language) and the language of many national minorities. On the
other hand, excessive measures aimed at a definite geographical localization of
language minorities may cause factors that would pose a threat to constitutionalism
and territorial integrity of Ukraine.
Subparagraph c) and f), paragraph 1, Article 7 of the Charter
The Constitution of Ukraine guarantees the citizens who belong to national
minorities, in accordance with the law, the right to receive teaching in their native
language, or to study their native language in state and communal education
establishments and through national cultural societies (Article 53).
Realizing its obligation to preserve regional or minority languages, the State takes
decisive measures aimed at their development in Ukraine. Thus according to the data
submitted by the Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine,
1,324 general secondary education establishments provide courses on minority
languages, furthermore minority languages are used in teaching.
The State provides necessary regulations and instruments for teaching and studying
minority languages at an according level.
According to the data submitted by the Ministry of Education and Science, Youth
and Sport of Ukraine, as of 2010 there are 19,414 general secondary education
establishments in Ukraine. Of these, in 16,594 general secondary education
establishments (3,514,897 pupils) the education process is carried out in Ukrainian, in
1,149 schools (692,806 pupils) œ in Russian, in 82 schools (18,866 pupils) œ in
Romanian, in 66 schools (15,126 pupils) œ in Hungarian, in 15 schools (1,357 pupils)
œ in Crimean Tatar, in 6 schools (3,877 pupils) œ in Moldovan, in 5 schools (1,357
pupils) œ in Polish. Furthermore, in 1,496 schools education is carried out in two or
more languages.
Besides, a considerable number of pupils study minority languages as optional
subjects or in out-of-school hours. In 2011, 131,471 pupils study Russian, 289 pupils
œ Romanian, 390 pupils œ Hungarian, 5,097 pupils œ Crimean Tatar, 275 œ
Moldovan, 3,516 œ Polish, 246 pupils œ Slovak, 764 pupils œ Bulgarian, 610 pupils
œ modern Greek, 13 pupils œ Hebrew, 115 pupils œ Turkish, 71 pupils œ Czech, 40
pupils œ Armenian, 38 pupils œ Crimean Greek, 29 pupils œ Estonian, 19 pupils œ
Urum as optional subjects or in out-of-school hours.
The functions of organizing a research and experimental work aimed at the
improvement of vocational training, publication of curricula, manuals, textbooks,
dictionaries and other reference books for education establishments where education
is carried out in minority languages, are performed by the Institute of Innovation
Technology and Curricula of the Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport
of Ukraine and its branch offices: in Drohobych, Zakarpatya, the Crimea, Odessa and
Chernivtsi.

8

The Crimean branch office is mainly involved in carrying out research into the issues
of education and upbringing for education establishments of the region, where
education is fulfilled in minority languages. The Crimean branch also studies the
prospects of improving education system and upbringing children who belong to
national minorities of the region.
The branch office staff systematically see to the process of Crimean minorities
language learning, they also attend to the provision of manuals and textbooks for
education establishments. Scientific-methodical maintenance of “Culture of
neighbourhood” special course is under way. The results of education, administrative
and psychological analysis of the efficiency of this special course, which has been
run for 5 years, as well as expert evaluations, showed that “Culture of
Neighbourhood” special course promotes patriotism, cultural and moral
consciousness and the development of communicative skills with children. It also
influences children’s attitude towards the world around them and to the people; the
special course assists in making groups of children united, it helps children have a
positive attitude towards various cultures and religions, it minimizes the level of
children’s aggressiveness and reduces the risk of having strong conflicts between
children. A number of steps were taken to share the experience of running a special
course “Culture of Neighbourhood” outside the Crimea, namely: a range of
presentations (in Lutsk, Rivne and Zhytomyr), the publication of workbooks on the
special course “Culture of Neighbourhood” for the first – fourth grades with
Ukrainian as a language of teaching, the republication of workbooks for the first
grade with Russian as a language of teaching, the All-Crimean contest of
photography and amateur video “The Crimean Mosaic: Cultural Diversity”. The
branch office also held a practical seminar on “The creation of favourable conditions
for children who study in ethnic minority schools in villages” (general secondary
school of Skalyste, municipal district of Bakhchisarai).
The branch office in Odessa established the team of authors, the members of which
were the staff of the office, scholars, and teachers of the region. They aimed at
drawing up curriculum plans on national minority languages and literatures
(Bulgarian, Gagauzian, Romani and Polish) for schools with Ukrainian as a language
of teaching, where minority languages are taught as separate subjects; on the
Moldovan language and literature for schools with Moldovan as a language of
teaching; team of authors also drew up a curriculum plan on the course “Literature”
for schools with Russian as a language of teaching. Together with the National
Academy of Pedagogical Sciences of Ukraine, the branch office reviews curriculum
plans and provides methodical support in drawing up education plans for education
establishments of the region of Odessa, such as: curriculum plans for extracurricular
education establishments on “the Moldovan Language, Art and Customs of the
Moldovans of Ukraine” for pupils of the first – fourth grades, on “Art and Customs of
the Bulgarians of Ukraine The development of the Bulgarian speech” – for pupils of
the fifth-twelfth grades.

9

The branch office in Zakarpatya is mainly involved in the development of methodical
aid for providing education services for national minorities of the region (
Hungarians, Romanians, Slovaks and Romani, etc.). The branch office cooperates
with the teaching staff of the school of Barkasiv with the Ukrainian and Hungarian
languages of teaching in the improvement of teaching and methodology for the
socialization of the youth. The branch office conducted regional scientific and
practical seminars: “Innovation technologies as a way to improve educative activities
on the Moldovan language and literature” using the facilities of the general secondary
school of Plaiutsk of the municipal region of Rakhiv (December 2010), “The main
features of the educative process in the first – fourth grades” in schools with the
Hungarian as a language of teaching” using the facilities of the general secondary
school # 7 of Berehove, where the predominant number of pupils belong to Romani
nationality.
Subparagraph d), Paragraph 1, Article 7 of the Charter
The present-day policy of Ukraine is aimed to popularize the cultural heritage and
language diversity of national minorities, residing in Ukraine. In view of this, the
Ministry of Culture of Ukraine, being an authorized body of state power in charge of
the cultural policy, gave financial support for the organizations which represent
national minorities, to publish periodicals and books, to hold cultural events, that
would aim at developing and broadening both written and spoken forms of minority
language usage in social and public life.
From 2007 to 2011 the Ministry of Culture of Ukraine constantly gave financial
support for public institutions of national minorities to hold planned events.
Thus in 2007-2008 the fiscal programme 1801260 “Events to revive cultures of
national minorities” budgeted 1,500,000 UAH for the range of cultural-creative
events, that primarily aimed to maintain, develop and preserve treasures of the
national cultural heritage that prove the harmony in coexistence of different national
minorities in Ukraine. There are several vivid examples to prove this fact: cultural
literary event “Taras Shevchenko in world literature” (poetry by T. Shevchenko in
minority languages), cultural festival “Feel the taste of your native language” in the
framework of the International festival of languages “An Ecology of
Communication”, international festival of theatres of national minorities of Ukraine
and the Carpathian Euroregion “Ethno-Dia-Sphere”, the festival of culture of
Germans of Ukraine , scientific practical conference dedicated to The Day of Slavic
Writing and Culture “Ukrainian book translated into minority languages”, AllUkrainian scientific practical conference on Romani Studies “The Romani of
Ukraine: from past to future”, All-Ukrainian ethnic exhibition of handicrafts
“Colourful Wonder” (handicraft goods by national craftsmen – representatives of
national minorities of Ukraine), All-Ukrainian festival of artistic families of national
minorities, All-Ukrainian festival of Moldovan culture “The Dniester Wave”, AllUkrainian festival of German culture, All-Ukrainian festival of Jewish theatres

10

“Wandering Stars”, International Romani festival “Amala”, festival of Hungarian
culture in Ukraine, All-Ukrainian festival of Korean culture in Ukraine “Koreiada”,
festival of the Ukrainian and Turkish culture “Kalos limen Akmechet”, Crimean
Tatar feast for the youth “Dervisa”, The Congress of the Jewish Council of Ukraine,
All-Ukrainian festival of Polish culture in Ukraine, the festival of Greek culture in
Ukraine, practical seminar “Folk songs and folklore – the main source of art of
amateur bands of public organizations of the Belarusians of Ukraine ”, ethnic
Crimean Tatar festival for the youth “Khidirlez”.
The Ministry of Culture of Ukraine together with national-cultural organizations gave
financial and organizational support for cultural-creative events to The Council of
national communities of Ukraine, Crimean Tatar fund of art and ethnography, The
Association of the Germans, The Federation of the Greeks, The Fellowship of the
Poles, ALL-Ukrainian Fellowship of the Belarusians, The Association of the
Koreans, The Jewish Fund, All-Ukrainian national cultural centre “Russkoie
Sobraniie”, All-Ukrainian Association “The Congress of the Romani of Ukraine”,
All-Ukrainian Fellowship of the Hungarians, The Council of national associations of
the region of Mykolaiv, etc.
With the aim to develop the traditions and culture of the Ukrainian nation, the
promotion of cultural diversity of national minorities of Ukraine, integration into the
European cultural environment and strengthening mutual understanding between
people of different nationalities, the President of Ukraine issued a decree of 25.02.08
# 153, under which 2008 shall be announced the Year of Intercultural Dialogue in
Ukraine. That very year, a range of events representing cultural-artistic heritage of all
the nations took place.
At the end of the Year of Intercultural Communication the Ministry of Culture and
Tourism of Ukraine held All-Ukrainian cultural-creative event “Together in
diversity” in Kyiv on December 10-12, 2008.
Within the event there were held All-Ukrainian art and photography exhibition
“Ukraine is our home”, the Concert of creative groups of national minorities of
Ukraine, All-Ukrainian conference “Multicultural essence of cultural monuments of
Ukraine”, All-Ukrainian seminar for the members of the Council of national
communities of Ukraine, Seminar of the managers of the groups of the summer camp
of tolerance.
Among the participants of the events there were the craftsmen of decorative art,
ethnographers, experts in folklore, artistic groups of different ages and heads of
national cultural associations. The participants of the event underlined the
importance of mutual understanding at present and noted the attention of the state to
the uniqueness of culture of every nation.
In 2009, the amount of financial expenditure according to "KPKVK 1801260"
"Measures to recreate culture of national minorities" was significantly reduced and

11

accounted for 150,000 UAH. Nevertheless, the Ministry of Culture of Ukraine in
cooperation with other state and community organizations celebrated the 150th
anniversary of the famous Jewish writer Sholom Aleichem. In March this year, there
were literary and artistic meetings, the museum of the writer was opened in Kyiv, a
range of exhibitions took place.
There were also a range of events dedicated to the 200th anniversary of Juliusz
Slovatskyi. In the city of Kremenets' of the region of Ternopil there were a range of
events: Ukrainian-Polish literary-artistic meetings "The Dialogue between two
cultures", scientific conference "Slovak known and unknown", scientific conference
of experts in literature, Conference of research workers of museums of Ukraine and
the Republic of Poland, presentations of literary works and books by Polish and
Ukrainian writers, Ukrainian-Polish creative plein-air, the Day of the Slovatskyi
street, concert "Birthday of Juliusz", laying-flowers ceremony at the tomb of the
poet's mother Solomeia Slovatska and at the monument to Taras Shevchenko,
unveiling and consecration of the memorial plate on the former Catholic Church of
the lyceum of Kremenets, international photo - plein - air organized by the National
museum "Zemli Peremyshlianskoi" in Peremyshl'. The Ukrainian institutions of
education, science, culture, extracurricullar institutions, libraries and museums also
held a number of educative and information events dedicated to the 200th anniversary
of Juliusz Slovatskyi.
In 2009, Ukrainian national culture forum "Ukraine: artistic diversity and dialogue
between culturer gained a new contemporary meaning.
An extensive program of activities of the Forum included the International scientificpractical conference "Intercultural Dialogue and Ukrainian ethno-cultural policy",
exhibition of literature in minority languages; nationwide photo exhibition "Ethnic
diversity of Ukraine" concert of creative teams of different ethnic groups of Ukraine
"We are all your children, Ukraine!"
More than 300 participants from differnet regions of Ukraine took part in the Forum.
During the All-Ukrainian Forum the representatives of national cultural societies of
Azerbaijanis, Armenians, Russians, Romani, Poles, Belorussians, Crimean Tatars,
Georgians, Greeks and Moldovans obtained high state awards.
In 2010, according to the fiscal programme 3 million 500 thousand UAH was
allocated for the events aimed at recreating the culture of ethnic minorities.
The Ministry of Culture of Ukraine together with national-cultural organizations gave
financial and organizational support for cultural-creative events to The Council of
national communities of Ukraine, Crimean Tatar fund of art and ethnography, The
Association of the Germans, The Federation of the Greeks, The Fellowship of the
Poles, All-Ukrainian Fellowship of the Belarusians, The Association of the Koreans,
The Jewish Fund, All-Ukrainian national cultural centre “Russkoie Sobraniie”, AllUkrainian Association “The Congress of the Romani of Ukraine”, All-Ukrainian

12

Fellowship of the Hungarians, The Council of national associations of the region of
Mykolaiv, etc. As a result, a number of events were held, namely:
- All-Ukrainian festival of cultures of national minorities "Tavria family" (in
Henichesk, Kherson region);
- XII International Theatre Festival "Wandering Stars" (in Kyiv);
- International conference "Our historical and cultural heritage - a constant source of
revival and development of original Belarusian culture in Ukraine" (in Kyiv);
- XI International Romani Festival "Amala-2010" (in Kyiv);
- All-Ukrainian Festival of Moldovan culture "Dniester Wave" ( Serhiivka, Odessa
region);
- All-Ukrainian festival of national cultures of the Southern region of Ukraine
"Friendship" (in Mykolaiv);
- International poetry festival "MERIDIAN CZERNOWITZ" (in Chernivtsi);
- Cultural and artistic event to support the culture of ethnic groups who do not have
their historical homeland, and to support minority peoples of the Crimea (in Kyiv);
- VI International festival-competition of Romanian folklore "Diversity flower
garden" (in Chernivtsi);
- International plein-air painting "Etnokolir-Crimea" (the Crimea);
- Festival of Georgian culture in Ukraine ( Kyiv)
- All-Ukrainian Festival of Korean Culture ( Kyiv)
- High-plein of various genres of art for creative young people - representatives of
national minorities of Ukraine (Chernivtsi region)
- VI All-Ukrainian Festival of Greek song, named after Tamara Katsy ( in Mariupol,
Donetsk region),
- Festival of German folklore (in Kyiv)
- Scientific-practical conference "Artistic Ukraine: multicultural creative activities of
National Societies of Ukraine" ( Kyiv)
- National exhibition of arts and crafts, fine photography and ethnic groups of
Ukraine ( Kyiv)
- XIII All-Ukrainian Festival of Jewish Art "Shalom, Ukraine!" ( Kyiv)
- Children's camp "Sources of Tolerance" (uts. Yasin, Rakhiv district,
Transcarpathian region);

13

- Cultural and education event for children of deported peoples of the Crimea
"The joy of rebirth" (in Feodosia, Crimea);
- Youth Forum "Xenophobia - ethnotolerance as the format of communication of
today's youth "(in Kyiv, State Institution "National Library of Ukraine for Children");
- Cultural and artistic events for children of ethnic minorities of Ukraine "Nicholas
comes with gifts in his sack" ( Kyiv, Simferopol, Odessa, Novoselytsya of the region
of Chernivtsi, Uzhhorod);
- National Conference "We are Ukrainian" (Kyiv);
- Cultural and artistic events, devoted to the problems of refugees, "We are all
different - we are all equal" at the Center for Ethnography "Mamaeva Sloboda";
- All-Ukrainian forum of national cultures "Ukraine: artistic diversity and dialogue
of cultures" (Kyiv).

The State budget of 2011 allocates 1,000,000 UAH to the events to recreate the
cultures of national minorities.
During January and September 2011, the Council of National Societies held the
National exhibition of Fine Arts of ethnic groups of Ukraine "Vivat, Ukraine!"
(dedicated to the 20th anniversary of Independence of Ukraine) and Ukrainian
Conference of National Minorities "We are the Ukrainians". The Congress of
National Communities held Cultural and artistic event "Children's camp" "Sources of
Tolerance". Association of Germans of Ukraine held Ukrainian children's forum
"Community". Jewish Forum of Ukraine held International Theatre Festival
"Wandering Stars", dedicated to the classical writer of the Ukrainian Jewish literature
Sholom Aleichem. Chernivtsi regional public organization "Cultural Capital" held II
International Poetry Festival "MERIDIAN CZERNOWITZ". The Greek Federation
of Ukraine held Ukrainian festival of Greek culture "Mega Yorty." The total
expenditure for these events accounts for more than 300,000 UAH.
Subparagraph g), Paragraph 1, Article 7 of the Charter
The education system of Ukraine stipulates that the persons who do not speak a
certain language of a national minority and who live in the area where it is spoken,
can learn it if they wish. Typically, the Ukrainians and other nationalities in the areas,
densely populated by a minority, study these languages, as well as representatives of
the minority who do not speak the language.

The Belarusian language

14

Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, cultural and education centres,
Saturday and Sunday schools provide courses on the Belarusian language ( in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea and Odessa region).

The Bulgarian Language
General secondary schools, universities, cultural and education centres of the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea, regions of Zaporizhya, Kirovohrad, Mykolayiv and
Odessa provide courses on the Bulgarian language.

The Armenian language
General secondary schools, cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday
schools in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, regions of Dnipropetrovsk, Lviv,
Mykolayiv, Kharkiv and the city of Kyiv provide courses on the Armenian language.

The Gagauzian language
General secondary schools of the Odessa region provide courses on the Gagauzian
language.

Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
General Secondary schools and universities, cultural and education centers, Saturday
and Sunday schools of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, regions of Donetsk,
Odessa, Kherson and cities of Kyiv and Sevastopol provide courses on the Modern
Greek language.
General secondary schools in Donetsk region provide courses on the Romani and
Urum languages.
The Estonian language
General secondary schools, cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday
schools in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea provide courses on the Estonian
language.

Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
General secondary schools and cultural and education centres in all the administrative
units provide courses on the Hebrew language.

15

Cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday schools in the regions of
Vinnytsia, Zhytomyr, Zaporizhya, Kyiv, Lviv, Odessa, Kharkiv, Cherkasy,
Chernivtsi, Chernihiv and the city of Kyiv provide courses on the Yiddish language.

The Karaite language
Cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday schools in the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea provide courses on the Karaite language.

The Korean language
General secondary schools and cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday
schools in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, the regions of Dnipropetrovsk,
Mykolaiv, Odessa, Kharkiv, Cherkasy and in the city of Kyiv provide courses on the
Korean language.

The Crimean Tatar language
General secondary schools and universities, Saturday and Sunday schools in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea, the regions of Zaporizhya, Kherson and the city of
Sevastopol provide courses on the Crimean Tatar language.

The Krimchak language
Saturday and Sunday schools in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
provide courses on the Krimchak language.

The Moldovan language
General secondary schools of the Odessa region provide courses on the Moldovan
language.

The German language
General secondary, vocational and higher education establishments of all
administrative units provide courses on the German language.

The Polish language

16

General secondary schools and universities, cultural and education centres, Saturday
and Sunday schools in the regions of Vinnytsia, Volyn, Zhytomyr, Ivano-Frankivsk,
Kyiv, Lviv, Odessa, Rivne, Ternopil, Khmelnytsk, Chernivtsi and the city of Kyiv
provide courses on the Polish language.

The Romani language
Cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday schools in the regions
of Donetsk and Odessa provide courses on the Romani language.

The Russian language
General secondary, vocational and higher education establishments, cultural and
education centres, Saturday and Sunday schools in all the administrative units
provide courses on the Russian language.

The Romanian language
General secondary schools and universities of the Transcarpathian and Chernivtsi
regions provide courses on the Romanian language.

The Slovak language
General secondary schools of Transcarpathian region and the Uzhhorod National
University provide courses on the Slovak language.

The Tatar language
Cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday schools in the regions
of Donetsk and Zaporizhya provide courses on the Tatar language.

The Turkish language
The universities in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the Saturday
school in the region of Mykolaiv provide courses on the Turkish language.

The Hungarian language

17

General secondary schools and universities of the Transcarpathian region provide
courses on the Hungarian language.

The Czech language
The universities, cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday schools in the
regions of Vinnytsia, Zhytomyr, Zaporizhya, Odessa, Mykolaiv, Rivne and Cherkasy
provide courses on the Czech language.

Subparagraph h), Paragraph 1, Article 7 of the Charter
The Ministry of Education, Youth and Sport of Ukraine promotes scientific
researches into minority languages at universities and research institutions.
Thus, in 2007-2010 the Ministry together with the State Fund for Fundamental
Research funded a number of research projects on culture, history, language and
religion of national minorities of Ukraine. Such research projects were also
perpetrated by each particular university and research institution. Among research
topics there were:
"Ethno-cultural characteristics and geographical factors of the Eastern Tavrida in
national development of Ukraine" (the Melitopol State Pedagogical University);
"Modern onomastics of Ukraine and national, social and legal peculiarities of its
reproduction," "Interference of languages, literatures and cultures in the Carpathian
Basin" ( the Uzhhorod National University);
"The formation of national identity of a citizen of Ukraine in the conditions of
bilingualism", "The peculiarities of the vocabulary of languages and dialects of the
people of the Luhansk region", "Ethnic Languages in the Luhansk regional legal
policy".
"Toponymic ethno-semantics of the Eastern region of Ukraine",
"Lingvocultural integration of ethnic minorities in the Eastern region of Ukraine (on
the basis of the German and Polish languages). (the Volodymyr Dahl East Ukrainian
National University);
"Literary languages and dialects of Ukrainian Danube region" (the State Humanities
University of Izmail). The purpose of this long term project is a comprehensive
analysis of the dialects and the language situation on the territory between the
Dniester and the Danube and the study of the functioning of various units and
categories at different levels of the Ukrainian, Russian, Bulgarian, Moldovan,
Romanian, Gagauzian languages. Its final result is a creation of a "multilingual map
of the territory between the Dniester and the Danube").

18

The department of Turkish Studies at the Taras Shevchenko National University of
Kyiv annually holds a roundtable discussion on the topic "Turkic peoples of Ukraine"
(the problem of education of the Crimean Tatars, Gagauzians, Uruma, Karaites,
Krimchaks).

The Belarusian language
"Ethno-cultural processes of the Ukrainian-Belarusian borderland" (the Institute of
Art, Folklore and Ethnology of National Academy of Sciences of Ukraine).

The Bulgarian Language
"The Bulgarian language, historical development and dialectal division" (the
Mechnikov National University of Odessa). The Department of the Bulgarian
Philology is also working on the creation of a lexical file on the Bulgarian dialects of
Southern Ukraine. All the staff and postgraduate students are members of the Odessa
Bulgarian Research Society, which publishes the annual "Bulgarian Studies of
Odessa" and a scientific series of "Bulgarian dialects in Ukraine."

The Armenian language
"Ethno-linguistic parameters of ethnical identification of the Armenians in the city of
Alchevsk of the region of Luhansk "(the Volodymyr Dal East-Ukrainian National
University).

The Gagauzian language
The Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv prepared and published a
scientific collection "Literature. Folklore. Problems of Poetics: Gagauzian culture." in
2009.

Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
"The Greek people of Pre-Azov region in ethno-linguistic aspect", "Scientific and
methodical support for the courses on Greek-to-Ukrainian and Ukrainian-to-Greek
translation", "Lexical and grammatical units: etymology, functioning and usage of the
language (on the basis of the Germanic, Romance, Slavonic and modern Greek
languages)" The Institute of Ukrainian-Greece friendship and Hellenic Studies aims
to research into the typology of the Greek and Ukrainian languages, current issues of
Modern Greek dialectology and Translation Studies, the actual problems of teaching

19

Modern Greek as a foreign language. The University scholars published the first
Anthology of Cypriot Literature (in Greek and Russian).

The Karaite language
The Crimean State Engineering Pedagogical University conducts a comparative study
of the Crimean Tatar and Karaite languages, these topics are included in the list of
priority subjects of investigation of qualification projects. In 2011, a number of
bachelor's projects on the typology of morphology of the Crimean Tatar and Karaite
languages were done and eventually presented. In addition, the Department of the
Crimean Tatar literature accomplished the thesis on the Karaite folklore.
(Question 126 of the Committee of Experts)
The Department of the Karaite language and literature can eventually be formed in
the Crimean State Engineering Pedagogical University. As noted above, on the
request of the Karaite and Krimchak national-cultural societies, we are considering to
form a full-time staff of teachers of the Karaite and Krimchak languages at the
university. In case the university employs enough lecturers and researchers, the
administrative staff of the university may make a decision to take further steps to
form a department, which is supported by the Karaite community organization.

The Crimean Tatar language
"Areal linguistics and systematic description of the Crimean Tatar literary language",
"The revival of the cultural heritage of the Crimean Tatars: language and literature",
"The issues of learning historical grammar and grammar structures of the modern
Crimean Tatar language", "Thematic and elevated-artistic features of the
development of the Crimean Tatar literature of the XX - XXI centuries", "Genre
peculiarities of the literature of Middle Ages and folklore", "The issues of learning
historical grammar and grammar structures of the modern Turkish, Arabic, Persian
and Crimean Tatar languages", "The peculiarities of language phenomena of the
Crimean Tatar language (psycholinguistics, dialectology, word-building and syntax)",
"The creation of Russian - Crimean Tatar electronic dictionary of linguistic
equivalents", "The Classification of the units at different levels of the Crimean Tatar
language", "The simple sentence of the Crimean Tatar language: its structure and
typology" (the Tavrida National V.I. Vernadsky University). In 2010, the University
established a research centre of the Crimean Tatar language, literature and history
named after Bekir Choban-Zade.
The research centre of the Crimean Tatar language and literature in The Crimean
State Engineering Pedagogical University undertakes research into: "The Crimean
Tatar literature and folklore: history state and prospects", "Theory and History of the

20

Crimean Tatar and Turkish linguistics", "Theory and Practice of the Crimean Tatar
language". The research centre organized editing and scientific processing of the 10volume collected works of classics of the Crimean Tatar literature.

The German language
"The issues of the modern German Studies and methodology of the German language
teaching" (the National University of Uzhhorod carries out research into German
lexical borrowings in the Ukrainian dialects of the Transcarpathian region, the
existence of German antroponimia in multicultural area and regional peculiarities of
the development of Bavarian and Austrian dialects in the Transcarpathian region).
Head of the Department of German Philology O.M. Hvozdiak in co-authorship with
German scholars published the monograph "The German minorities in Central and
Eastern Europe" in Germany in 2008.

The Polish language
"Comparative Grammar of the Russian, Polish and Ukrainian languages
(Representation of the category of aspectuality)" (the Cherkasy State Technological
University); "Peculiar features of the language of the Polish diaspora in multi-ethnic
environment in terms of sociolinguistic contactology in the region of Luhansk" (the
Volodymyr Dahl East Ukrainian National University); "Specific feature of the Polish
dialect in Horodok", "The research process of the Polish dialect in East borderland",
"Polish borrowings in Volyn and Polissia toponyms (on the basis of the dictionary
"Old Volyn and Polissia "by V. Tsynkalovsky)", "Periodization, socio-historical and
cultural precondition of Ukrainian interference into the Polish language", "Polish
writers of the XVI-XIX centuries who came from ethnic Ukrainian lands and their
role in enriching the vocabulary of the Polish language with Ukrainian lexis",
"National and cultural specifics of Polish, German and French set phrases" (the
National University "Ostroh Academy").
The Department of Polonaise Studies of the Institute of Philology at the Taras
Shevchenko National University of Kyiv published collected scientific papers `Kyiv
Polish Studios` (11 volumes). The department initiated publishing a series of
bilingual texts (Polish and Ukrainian). It published the following anthologies: "Y.
Slovatsky. Poetry", "J. Ivashkevych. Poetry", "Chime of the Polish lute". The
department held five international conferences "A. Mickiewicz and Ukraine "," J.
Slovatsky and Ukraine", "Y. Ivashkevych and Ukraine", "Ukrainian school in
literature and culture of the Ukrainian-Polish borderland ", "European dimension of
the Ukrainian Polonaise Studies". In September 2010, the Department held an
international interdisciplinary scientific conference "Polish-Ukrainian Bulletin: the
European tradition of dialogue of cultures", dedicated to the 10th anniversary of the
foundation of the department.

21

The scholars of the Department of Polish Philology at the Ivan Franko National
University of Lviv are scientific advisers to postgraduate students and assistants who
carry out research into the Polish and Slavic linguistics and literature. The department
holds scientific seminars, where the participants discuss current issues of the Polish
literature and linguistics, methodology of teaching Polish literature, culture and
Polish as a foreign language. Apart from the department staff, the Polish Scholars are
invited to participate in seminars. Since 2009, the scholars of the Department have
been doing research into the issue "The Condition and the development of the
Polonaise Studies in Ukraine". In collaboration with the School of Polish Language
and Culture of University Slaskie, the Department analysed and published the
collection of scientific papers devoted to the current state of the Polonaise Studies in
Ukraine (Postscriptum Polonistyczne: Polonistyka i język polski na Ukrainie. - 2009.
- Nr 1 (3). In December 2009, the Department organized an international student
conference dedicated to the 200th anniversary of the birth of J. Slovatsky: "J.
Slovatsky: a view from the perspective of the XXI century."
The Department of General and Slavonic Linguistics at the Mechnikov National
University of Odessa is conducting research on the Polish language within the
research framework of the department «Modern problems of linguistic Slavic Studies
in synchrony and diachrony." The monograph "Polish Glossary of water industry:
from ancient to modern times" was published.
The Lesia Ukrainka National University of Volyn determined the topic "Slavic
language and literary space" as a research subject of the Department of Polish
Philology. The key research areas are: the Ukrainian-Polish language and literary
contacts and parallels, urgent issues of comparative literature. The department
determined a range of issues, they are: "Universal values in Slavic literatures of the
late nineteenth and twentieth centuries", "Polish-Ukrainian literary parallels,"
"Vertical context of fiction". The Department organized a research laboratory "Slavic
literature: problems and prospects for research.
The Department of Slavic and Germanic languages of the Ivan Franko State
University of Zhytomyr established the Centre for Polonaise Studies, the main
purpose of which is carrying out researches on the Polish language. Besides, the
Centre is mainly involved in publishing the scientific journal "Ukrainian Polonaise
Studies", organizing methodical activities for teachers of the Polish language, in
cultural and education activities for students and studying Polish.

The Russian language
"The Russian language: linguistic units functioning in synchrony and diachrony" (the
Mechnikov National University of Odessa). The Department of the Russian language
edits the scientific journal "Language". "Lexical-grammatical categories in modern

22

Russian and lingvodidactics" (the Mykhailo Kotsyubynsky State Pedagogical
University of Vinnytsia);
"Social and cultural features of the functioning of the Russian language in the urban
environment of Ukraine (the Vynnychenko State Pedagogical University of
Kirovohrad);
"Linguistic-stylistic study of Russian media", "Literary study of modern and classic
Russian literature," "Historical lexicology in the area of the Russian and East Slavic
languages" (the Sumy State University);
"Phraseological univerbation in modern Russian" (the Ivan Ohienko National
University of Kamianets Podilsk);
"The Russian literature in Ukraine: the issues of teaching and studying: developing a
concept of teaching the Russian literature in Ukraine", "Empirical study of lexical
and semantic processes in the language of Russian - and Ukrainian - speaking people
on the lands of late settlement" (in collaboration with The State University of
Volhohrad) (Russia), "Language and socio-political image of youth of Kuzbas and
Donbas" (in collaboration with the State University of Kemerovo) (Russia). (the
Horlivka State Pedagogical Institute of Foreign Languages).
"Techniques and procedures for comparative-historical method in Ukrainian and
Russian linguistics of the nineteenth century through the 30s of the XX century. (the
Slavonic State Pedagogical University).
The Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, together with other institutions
holds an annual conference "Russian language and literature, issues of teaching and
studying". The Department of the Russian language edits two collections of scientific
papers: "The Russian language, literature and culture in secondary school and higher
education establishment" and "Rusistics".

The Romanian language
"The current state of regional and ethnic identities on the Ukrainian-Romanian
borderland: socio-political analysis", "The Romanian language in Ukraine and the
Ukrainian language in Romania in the context of current European integration
processes" (the Fedkovych National University of Chernivtsi).

The Slovak language
The National University of Uzhhorod comprises two departments, doing research into
the contrastive linguistics, lexicography, onomatology and literary translation, they
are: the Department of Slovak Philology and All-Ukrainian scientific methodical
centre for Slovak Studies. These departments perform research into Slovak-Ukrainian

23

literary connections, the issues of ethno-genesis and ethnic history of the region of
the Southern Carpathian Mountains and interlingual connections in the Carpathian
region. In addition, in 2006, on the request of the Legislation Institute of the
Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine, the researchers of the department performed the
research project "Development of lexicographic parameters of the Ukrainian-Slovak
dictionary, based on law terms". As a result of the researches performed by the
scholars and lecturers of the department and the Centre, a number of modern
textbooks and scientific teaching aids were released, including the first textbook in
Ukraine "Slovak language", manuals "History of Slovakia", "Contemporary Slovak
legal terminology" and other books for university students. The Department edits the
scientific journal "Studia Slovakistica" (10 issues published) and a collection of
students' translations "Between the Carpathians and the Tatra Mountains" (8 issues
published).

The Hungarian language
"Language and Culture: sociolinguistic, pragmatic and communicative aspects of
their interaction. The relationship of the two cultures of neighboring nations
(Ukrainians and the Hungarians) (the National University of Uzhhorod). The
Department of Hungarian philology of the Faculty of Humanities where teaching is
performed in the Hungarian language, established the Centre of Hungarológia. The
Centre aims to support and coordinate scientific and teaching process, to do research
into the Hungarian language, literature, history, ethnography and culture, to develop
cooperation between scholars, lecturers and subject specialists who are involved in
this activity in various Higher education establishments, scientific institutions,
schools, publishing houses and editorial offices in Ukraine and to promote research
into the culture of the Hungarians who live in the Transcarpathian region. Three
volumes of "Dictionary of Hungarian dialects of Transcarpathia", the "UkrainianHungarian dictionary of set phrases and expressions," dictionary "Hungarian
Southern Carpathian dialects in Zatyssya of the municipal district of Vinogradiv"
and 20 volumes of specialized collection of research papers «Acta Hungarica» were
published. The Centre of Hungarológia established the Transcarpathian Hungarian
Scientific Society that released 5 specialized issues of scientific papers.
Part II of the Charter Article 7
Part 1

The Azerbaijani language
10 cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday schools (210 pupils) in the
regions of Dnipropetrovsk, Mykolaiv, Kharkiv and the city of Kyiv provide courses
on the Azerbaijani language. These education establishments use adapted programs

24

and textbooks on the Azerbaijani language, literature and history for general
secondary schools developed in Azerbaijan.

The Assyrian language
On September 1, 2011 the Sunday school with Assyrian as a language of teaching, is
scheduled to resume its work in the city of Zaporizhya.

The Bashkir language
The Saturday school of Kyiv provides classes in the Bashkir language (8 pupils). The
school uses adapted programs and textbooks on the Bashkir language for general
secondary schools developed in the Republic of Bashkortostan (Russia).

The Belarusian language
The Institute of philology of the Taras Shevchenko National University of
Kyiv opened the Centre of the Belarusian language and culture in 2009. It conducts
courses on the Belarusian language, organizes and participates in cultural and
education programmes, creates proper conditions for studying the Belarusian
language and literature, develops curriculum plans to train experts in the Belarusian
language.

The Bulgarian Language
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine
developed and published curriculum plans on the Bulgarian language and reading for
the 1st-4-th grades and on the Bulgarian language for the 5-th - 11-th grades of
general secondary schools with Bulgarian as a language of teaching. The Ministry
approved of the curriculum plan on the "Bulgarian literature (extracurricular course)"
for the 10-th - 11-th grades for schools with Ukrainian and Russian languages of
teaching.
With regard to the revision of the State Standard of elementary and secondary
education in 2011, the Ministry developed new curriculum plans on the Bulgarian
language and reading for 1st-4th grades of general secondary schools with Bulgarian
language of teaching (for the first time) and with the Ukrainian language of teaching.
In 2000-2011 the Ministry classified and recommended to publish textbooks on the
Bulgarian language for the 3rd and 5th grades, supplementary textbooks, manuals and
methodological guidelines. Education process involves adapted manuals on the

25

Bulgarian language and literature for secondary schools developed in the Republic of
Bulgaria.
Every year in the region of Odessa, the Bulgarian language and literature contest for
pupils of secondary schools is held as well as the competition "Teacher of the Year"
in nomination for "the best teacher of the Bulgarian language and literature",
International Festival of Bulgarian folk art and folklore "Summer of Belgrade" (in in
the city of Belgrade).
The State Pedagogical University of Berdiansk launched a nationwide student
competition in the Bulgarian language in 2011.
General secondary schools of the municipal district of Vilshanka of Kirovohrad
region have special days of the Bulgarian culture and language "Druhare."
Competitions were held for the best performance of Bulgarian poetry, songs, dances,
cooking national dishes.
The Department of General Linguistics and Slavic Languages at the State Humanities
University of Izmail employs 6 Ph.Ds., associate professors and 1 lecturer. It
provides courses on the Bulgarian language. The Bulgarian language is taught by a
PhD, a professor and one lecturer.
The Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv prepared and published a
"Ukrainian-Bulgarian dictionary of linguistic terminology."

The Armenian language
With regard to the parents applications in the 2010/2011 academic year in the Crimea
in general secondary schools 40 students study the Armenian language in out-ofschool hours or in language clubs.
Armenian is also taught in 15 cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday
schools (564 pupils) in the Dnipropetrovsk, Luhansk, Lviv, Mykolaiv, Kharkiv
regions and in the city of Kyiv.
In 2011, a new curriculum plan on the Armenian language and reading for the 1st-4th
grades of secondary schools was developed.
In the city of Lviv there is an Armenian Sunday school in which 40 students are
enrolled. The Head of the School is a group leader on staff of the Armenian
Language Centre for Children and Youth of Galicia.
In the Crimea there is an Alternative Armenian school, which comprises a Sunday
school, and groups which provide courses on the Armenian language and culture in
Simferopol, Evpatoria, Yalta, the village of Zybino of the municipal district of
Belogirsk and the city of Sevastopol.

26

Education process involves adapted manuals and curriculum plans on the Armenian
language for secondary schools developed in the Republic of Armenia.

The Gagauzian language
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine created and
published curricula on the Gagauzian language and reading for the 1st-4th grades and
on the Gagauzian language for the 5th-11th grades for general secondary schools
which provide courses on the Gagauzian language.
In 2011, a new curriculum plan on the Gagauzian language and reading for the 1st-4th
grades of secondary schools was developed.
Scientific-methodical commission for minority languages of the scientific and
technical council of the Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of
Ukraine recommended the publication of the manuscript on teaching and methodical
guidelines on the Gagauzian language for the 1st grade. The publication of a textbook
on the Gagauzian language for the 1st grade was financed by the state budget of
Ukraine (by the State Committee on Nationalities and Religions) and the Gagauzian
Union of Ukraine which also released manuals "Texts to develop fluent speech" and
"Methodical aids for teachers of the Gagauzian language and reading". The textbook
on the Gagauzian language "Famous Ukrainian classics: Taras Shevchenko and
Lesya Ukrainka were approved. Education process partly involves adapted manuals
on the Gagauzian language developed in the Republic of Moldova.
From 2012, in connection with the entry into force of new state standards for
elementary and general secondary education, the Ministry schedules to gradually
publish textbooks on the Gagauzian language for the 11th grade.
On the request of the speakers of the Gagauzian language, education process adopted
the Roman alphabet; hereby, there were no difficulties in the education process, as
the Roman alphabet best conveys the sounds of the Gagauzian language.
In the region of Odessa there was held a competition "Teacher of the Year" in
nomination for "the best teacher of the Gagauzian language and literature", as well an
annual literary competition in the Gagauzian language "My mother tongue! , "
Mother tongue! What unites us all together - our mother's first words, the first words
of a lovely lullaby song!"

Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine created and
published curricula on the Modern Greek language for the 2nd-11th grades for

27

general secondary schools which provide courses of the Modern Greek language and
curricula on out-of-hours study of the Modern Greek language in 5th-11th grades.
In 2011, a creative team was established to develop a new curriculum plan on the
Armenian language for 1st-4th grades of general secondary schools which provide
courses on the Modern Greek language.
The Ministry approved of the textbook "The Modern Greek language (elementary
level)" and "a workbook on the Greek language" for the 5th grade for secondary
education establishments. Education process involves adapted manuals and textbooks
on the Modern Greek language for secondary schools developed in Hellenic Republic
and the Republic of Cyprus. The Kyiv National University of Trade and Economics
prepared and published a textbook on Modern Greek for students.
In the region of Donetsk the curriculum plans "History of Ancient Greece and the
Greeks of Ukraine", "Culture of Greece, Greek folk dances" for secondary schools
and cultural centres were elaborated.
The Federation of Hellenic societies with the assistance of the Ministry, Regional
education management bodies of Donetsk and the State Administration holds an
annual nationwide competition in the Modern Greek language, history and culture of
Greece and the Ukrainian Greeks for pupils of secondary general schools (500 pupils)
and the competition "Teacher of the Year". At present the Ministry considers
conferring the State status upon the All-Ukrainian competition in the Greek language.
The commission on Education, Scientific and Methodological Council of the
Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine recommended
publishing a manual on the Greek language for higher education establishments.
State University of Mariupol is a higher education establishment that has a
specialized Faculty of the Hellenic Philology with professional staff. It trains
specialists in Modern Greek and translation. It is a base establishment that holds the
second round of All-Ukrainian students' competition on Modern Greek and the
second round of All-Ukrainian contest in student's scientific papers in arts and
sciences (in Modern Greek). The University comprises the Institute of UkrainianGreek friendship and Hellenistic studies, the purpose of which is to strengthen
friendship between the peoples of Ukraine, Greece and Cyprus, the expansion of
international cooperation in science, education and culture, the study of the Greek
diaspora in Ukraine. With the support of a permanent foreign partner - the
Foundation "Anastasios G. Levendis" (the Republic of Cyprus), the university opened
a unique library of Hellenistic Studies "Konstantynos Levendis" which comprises
more than 15 thousand issues of scientific, fiction and reference books both in
Modern Greek and other languages.
(Question 32 of the Committee of Experts)

28

The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine is constantly
holding consultations with the representatives of the Greek minority.With the aim of
drafting the Second Periodic Report, the Ministry held abovementioned consultations
on April 16, 2011 in Mariupol of the region of Donetsk (see Annex 1).
Besides, O.M. Dobra - a member of The Social Council of Education Programmes
managers of a All-Ukrainian associations for national minorities of Ukraine, the head
of education department in the Federation of Greek communities, is actively involved
in the activities of the Social Council. In 2010 the meeting of the Social Council
considered organizing the study of Modern Greek.

The Georgian language
Georgian is taught in 12 cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday schools
(483 students) in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, regions of Dnipropetrovsk,
Zaporizhya, Luhansk, Odessa, Poltava, Sumy, Kharkiv and the city of Kyiv.
Education process involves adapted manuals and curriculum plans on the Georgian
language, literature and culture for secondary schools developed in the Republic of
Georgia.

The Estonian language
Estonian is taught optionally in the secondary general school in Oleksandrivka of the
municipal district of Krasnogvardiysk of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea (29
pupils) and in the Saturday school in the city of Simferopol (20 pupils). Education
process involves adapted manuals and curriculum plans on the Estonian language for
secondary schools developed in the Republic of Estonia.

Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine created and
published curricula on the Hebrew language for the 5th-11th grades for general
secondary schools which provide courses on the Hebrew language and curricula on
out-of-hours study of the Hebrew language, history, culture and traditions of the
Jewish people and "Jewish children's literature (an optional course for students of 2nd
- 4th grades)" for education establishments with Ukrainian as a language of teaching.
In 2011, a new curriculum plan on the Hebrew language and reading for the 1st-4th
grades of secondary schools was developed.

29

In 2007, with the assistance of the State Committee for Religion and the Jewish
Foundation of Ukraine, the Ministry issued a manual in Yiddish "Mame-loshn" for
cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday schools and self-education. In
2009, the manual was copied to digital drives and released on a CD together with a
printed edition.
Education process involves adapted manuals and textbooks in Yiddish for secondary
schools developed in the State of Israel.
In the region of Dnipropetrovsk the curriculum plan "The history and traditions of the
Jewish people," "Art works" for cultural centres was elaborated.
In the region of Chernivtsi the curriculum plan "The history of the Jewish people,"
The traditions of the Jewish people," "The catastrophe of the European Jewry",
"Jewish literature" for 1st-4th and 5th-11th grades was developed.
The State University of Mariupol founded the Israeli cultural centre.
The Crimean Humanitarian University (in Yalta) developed and published a set of
education literature in Hebrew "Guidelines for lessons," "Didactic materials",
"Treasury Midrashiv."

(Question 83 of the Committee of Experts)
The information, provided in the First report, concerns both the Hebrew and the
Yiddish languages.

The Karaite language
The Association of Crimean Karaites "Krymkaraylar" with assistance of
education authorities in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea organized three Sunday
schools, where the Karaite language, history and culture are taught to 25 students.
The publication of "Russian-Karaite dictionary" and the manual "21 lessons
in the Karaite language (the Crimean dialect)" (an edition of 1,000 copies each) was
financed by the state budget of Ukraine and recommended by the Ministry.
The Education Management Board of the Municipal Council of Evpatoriia issued an
order, under which from September 1, 2011, an inter-school extracurricular classes in
the Karaite language shall be organized.
Training teachers of the Karaite language, if necessary, may be carried out at the
faculty of the Crimean Tatar and Oriental Philology at the Tavrida National V.I.
Vernadsy University and the Crimean Engineering-Pedagogical University.

30

The Korean language
The Korean language is taught in the education establishment # 181 "Donsuri" in
Kharkiv (188 pupils), private secondary general school as optional (17 pupils) in 14
cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday schools (589 pupils) in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea, regions of Dnipropetrovsk, Mykolaiv, Odessa,
Kharkiv, Cherkasy and in the city of Kyiv. Education process involves adapted
manuals and curriculum plans on the Korean language for secondary schools
developed in the Republic of Korea.

The Crimean Tatar language
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine created
and published curricula on the Crimean Tatar language and reading for the 1st-4th
grades and on the Crimean Tatar language and literature for 5th - 11th grades for
general secondary schools which provide courses on the Crimean Tatar language.
In 2011, a new curriculum plan on the Crimean Tatar language and reading for the
1st-4th grades of secondary schools with the Ukrainian language of teaching and with
the Crimean Tatar language of teaching was developed.
In 2000-2011 the publication of textbooks in the Crimean Tatar language and
literature for 1st-11th grades and textbooks in other subjects in translation into the
Crimean Tatar language was financed by the state budget. In 2008, "The Ukrainian Crimean Tatar and Crimean Tatar-Ukrainian Dictionary of terms for schools" was
released. In 2010, the manual for younger children "Popular Tales of a big family" in
the Crimean Tatar language was published. Besides, a number of other additional
textbooks and education programmes were recommended to publish.
The group of authors also developed the Ukrainian-Russian-Crimean Tatar thematic
dictionary "Wider Circle" and the curriculum on an optional course "Crimean Tatar
literature" for the 10th grade. In 2007-2010, in the Crimea, about 30 teaching and
methodical manuals on the Crimean Tatar language and literature for preschool,
secondary and higher education establishments.
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea established the Council of Heads of Schools with the Crimean
Tatar language of teaching. It annually monitors the development of the network of
classes and groups in which pupils study in Crimean Tatar, the quality of courses on
the Crimean Tatar language and literature in general secondary education
establishments of the Crimea. The members of the scientific and methodical Council

31

for scientific and methodical aids in Crimean Tatar for education establishments of
the Crimea analyse manuscripts of methodical guides in Crimean Tatar.
Every year in the Crimea, the Crimean Tatar language and literature contest for
pupils is held (from 2009 pupils from other regions have an access to the
competition), as well as the festival of pupils' creative art in Crimean Tatat "Our
mother tongue is precious, its spiritual treasures are inexhaustible", the competition
of pupils' creative art in Crimean Tatar named after Ynus Kandum "The Crimea is my
motherland". Junior Academy of Sciences "Researcher" in the framework of the
festival with the assistance of the newspaper "Янъы дюнья" holds a competition of
multimedia technologies "Аиле дегерликлери" ("Family Heirlooms") in Crimean
Tatar.
In the city of Sevastopol the competition of readers' Anna tylym hъururыm "(Mother
tongue is my pride) is annually held, attended by students of secondary schools,
where the Crimean Tatar language and literature is taught as an optional subject. The
Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea holds the republican stage of the competition 'Teacher of the Year" in
nomination for "The Crimean Tatar language and literature" in schools with the
Crimean Tatar language of teaching
The commission on Education, Scientific and Methodological Council of the
Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine recommended
publishing 6 manuals on the Crimean Tatar language for higher education
establishments.
The Department of the Crimean Tatar Philology and the Department of the Crimean
Tatar literature in the faculty of the Crimean Tatar and Oriental Philology at the
Tavrida National V.I. Vernadsky University provides courses on the Crimean Tatar
language and literature
The Department of the Crimean Tatar Philology employs 5 PhDs, 1 associate
professor, 4 senior lecturers and 1 lecturer.
The Department of the Crimean Tatar Philology employs 5 PhDs, 1 associate
professor, 4 senior lecturer and 4 lecturers.
The Department of Crimean Tatar and Turkish Philology at the Crimean
Engineering-Pedagogical University provides courses on the Crimean Tatar language.
It employs 16 lecturers, among them: Doctor of Letters, Full Professor.
The Department published a manual for students "Upbringing junior pupils in a
modern Crimean Tatar school family".
(Question 99 of the Committee of Experts)
In accordance with the State Programme which aims at settling deported Crimean
Tatars and people of other nationalities who returned to Ukraine and their adaptation

32

and integration in the Ukrainian society, 300,000 UAH was allocated at physical
infrastructure of the Crimean Engineering-Pedagogical University from the state
budget. 2,174,000 UAH was allocated at other education establishments from the
Budget of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea. 938,800 UAH was allocated at the
provision of education establishments with manuals and methodical aids. The
Autonomous Republic of Crimea allocated 3,748,000 UAH at publishing 63 kinds of
manuals and methodical aids and 60 kinds of fiction books.
The Krimchak language
The Association of Crimean Karaites "Krymkaraylar" with assistance of education
authorities in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea organized two Sunday schools in
the cities of Kerch and Feodosiia, where the Karaite language, history and culture are
taught to 24 students
In 2005 The publication of the manual “The Karaite language” (1,000 copies) was
financed by the state budget of Ukraine and recommended by the Ministry of
Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine.
In 2008 the publishing house of Simferopol “Dolia” released 500 copies of the
second edition of “Krimchak – Russian Dictionary” and the collection “Written
heritage of the Krimchaks”.
The Lithuanian language
In the city of Lviv there is a Lithuanian Sunday school in which 40 students are
enrolled
The Head of the School is a group leader on staff of the Lithuanian Language Centre
for Children and Youth of Galicia.
Education process involves adapted manuals and curriculum plans on the Lithuanian
language and literature for secondary schools developed in the Republic of Lithuania.
On September 1, 2011 the Sunday school with Lithuanian as a language of teaching,
is scheduled to resume its work in the city of Zaporizhya
The Moldovan language
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine created and
published curricula on the Moldovan language and literature for the 5th-11th grades
for general secondary schools which provide courses on the Moldovan language
In 2011 new curriculum plans on the Moldovan language and reading for the 1st - 4th
classes for general secondary schools were created with Moldovan as a language of
teaching and with Ukrainian as a language of teaching.
In 2000—2011 the publication of textbooks in the Moldovan language and literature
for 1st-11th grades and textbooks in other subjects in translation into the Moldovan

33

language was financed by the state budget. In 2008 "The Ukrainian - Moldovan and
Moldovan-Ukrainian Dictionary of terms for schools" was released. In 2010 the
manual for younger children "Popular Tales of a big family" in the Moldovan
language was published. Besides, a number of other additional textbooks and
education programmes were recommended to publish.
Every year in the region of Odessa the Moldovan language and literature contest for
pupils of secondary schools is held as well as the competition "Teacher of the Year"
in nomination for “The Best teacher of the Moldovan language and literature".
Together with All-Ukrainian Moldovan national and cultural association the Ministry
organizes regional youth festivals of the Moldovan language, spring festivals
"Mertsyshor".
On the request of the Moldovan community, we are considering the possibility to
provide courses on the Moldovan language at the Mechnikov National University of
Odessa.
The German language
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine created and
published curricula on the German language for the 1st-4th grades for general
secondary schools.
In 2011 new curriculum plans on the German language for the 1st - 4th classes for
general secondary schools were created.
In 2000-2011, the Ministry classified and recommended to publish textbooks on the
German language for the 1st and 11th grades, 62 supplementary textbooks, manuals
and methodological guidelines are yet to be published,
The Polish language
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine created and
published curricula on the Polish language and reading for the 1st-4th grades and on
the Polish language and literature for 5th - 11th grades for general secondary schools
and senior schools which provide courses on the Polish language
In 2011, a new curriculum plan on the Polish language and reading for the 1st-4th
grades of secondary schools was developed.
The curriculum plan on the Polish language and literature for extracurricular
education establishments was elaborated by the methodical centre of the office
branch of the Institute of innovation technologies and education of Drohobych.
The main activities of the branch office is elaboration of methodical aids for preschool establishments with Polish as a language of teaching, general secondary
education establishments with Polish as a language of teaching, for extracurricular

34

education establishments Cultural and education centres, Saturday and Sunday
schools.
The branch office launched a poetic competition “Mickiewicz and Ukraine” and AllUkrainian conference for teachers of the Polish language and literature of general
secondary education establishments on the topic “Innovative methods of teaching the
Polish language and literature”, practical seminars for teachers of the Polish language
"Methodology of teaching a child of a pre-school and elementary school age", for
students - “The Polish language and literature”.
The staff of the branch office took part in organizing an International scientific
conference for teachers of the Polish language and culture for general secondary
schools and extracurricular education establishments "Dialogue between cultures".
The text book “The Polish language” is recommended for advanced learning the
Polish language for senior pupils and students who study the Polish language.
The Ministry recommends the curriculum plan on the Polish language for 2nd – 11th
and 5th-11th grades, that was elaborated in the region of Volyn.
The Regional institute of postgraduate education in collaboration with the Consulate
of the Republic of Poland launched a competition dedicated to the anniversary of I.
Padarevsky, and the contest of the best declaimer of the Polish poetry.
The commission on Education, Scientific and Methodological Council of the
Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine recommended
publishing the manual on the Polish language for higher education establishments.
The Institute of Philology at the Taras Shevchenko National University affiliates the
Department of Polonaise Studies.
The Department employs: 1 Doctor of Letters, 4 PhDs and 3 – assistants. The
lecturers provide courses on regular and special subjects on literary and linguistic
Polonaise Studies, methodology of teaching Polish as a foreign language, theoretical
and applied Translation Studies.
In close collaboration with the Consulate of the Republic of Poland, the Department
managed to establish a library of the Polish literature with more than 15,000 issues.
The Department comprises "The Polish centre”, which aims to popularize the Polish
language and culture in Ukraine.
The department edited "The Ukrainian – Polish dictionary of linguistic terminology"
and a manual for students “Polish Translator’s competence”.
The Ivan Franko National University of Lviv has the Department of Polonaise
Studies.

35

The Ivan Franko State Pedagogical University of Drohobych has a center of
Polonaise Studies with a library.
In 2006. the Lesia Ukrainka National University of Volyn established the department
of Polish philology that employs 1 Doctor of Letters, 4 PhDs, and 1 assistant.
From 2007 the Vasyl Stefanyk Precarpathian National University holds an annual
orthographic competition on the Polish language that hosts participants from all over
Ukraine.
The folk Polish centre is affiliated to the Lviv regional House of teachers.
The Romani language
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine created and
published curricula on the Romani language for the 5th-11th grades for general
secondary schools which provide courses on the Romani language.
In 2011, a new curriculum plan on the Romani language and reading for the 1st-4th
grades of secondary schools was developed.
Cultural and education centres, 3 Saturday and Sunday schools (45 pupils) in the
regions of Donetsk and Odessa provide courses on the Romani language.
The heads of the regional Donetsk cultural and education community of Romani
women “Miriklia” teach children the Romani language, culture, traditions of the
Romani people using the following manuals: “ABC book”, “The history of Gypsies”,
“Reference book of the Romani language”, “Ukrainian – Romani phrase book”.
In secondary general school # 14 in the city of Uzhhorod of the Transcarpathian
region pupils can study the subject "The history and traditions of Romani", that was
elaborated by Navrotska E.M, who published a methodical manual for teachers to
promote tolerance to Romani and the book on the history of the Romani Holocaust.
General Secondary school # 10 in Pryluki of the region of Cherkasy pays
considerable attention to studying national culture of the Romani.
In the following academic year the establishment held a school festival of Romani
culture
National folklore band "The Black Pearl" is affiliated to the general secondary school
# 3 of Merephiany of the municipal district of Kharkiv of the region of Kharkiv.
The Russian language
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine created and
published curricula on the Russian language and reading for the 1st-4th grades and on
the Russian language and literature for 5th - 11th grades for general secondary
schools, which provide courses on the Russian language and for schools with Russian

36

as a language of teaching. The Ministry approved the curriculum plan "The Russian
language, extracurricular course for 5th – 11th grades for secondary education
establishments with Ukrainian as a language of teaching and a curriculum plan on an
optional course “The lessons in Philology ”
In 2011, a new curriculum plan on the Russian language and reading for the 1st-4th
grades of secondary schools was developed.
A new Curriculum plan on study of local folklore was elaborated in the region of
Vinnytsia.
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine offered two
typical curriculum plans for schools with Ukrainian as a language of teaching, where
pupils can study Russian as an option.
One of them envisages studying the Russian language (or other minority languages)
as a compulsory subject for 1st – 11th grades 2 hours a week, another one envisages
studying the minority languages as optional subjects (1st - 11th grades)
Such variance gave a possibility to take regional features of Ukraine into
consideration.

In 2010-2011, 25 kinds of books in a series “School library” with prefaces and
commentaries on the Russian language and literature were published. These books
are classified by the Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine
as textbooks for general secondary education establishments.
The Republican higher education establishments of the 1st-4th levels of accreditation
of the Crimea published about 25 teaching and methodical manuals on the Russian
language and literature and 16 kinds of textbooks, secondary and higher education
establishments.
In 2009 the Regional state council of Donetsk launched an annual competition in
nomination of “The best teacher of the Russian language and literature of the year”.
Every year pupils participate in a Contest of pupils’ electronic presentations on the
Russian language and literature. Teachers together with their pupils take part in the
events dedicated to the anniversary of O.S. Pushkin and to the student's day (October
19). 15 best students and teachers are awarded with fiction books. A range of events
dedicated to anniversaries of O.S. Pushkin, M.V. Hohol, A.P.Chehov, M.A.
Bulhakov take place, among them: there are scientific and practical conferences,
teachers' seminars, etc.
A textbook "The Russian language" was edited in the region of Dnipropetrovsk, as
well as commentaries, exercises, texts, “Typological orthography of the Russian and
Ukrainian languages”, dictations and a workbook of orthography of the Russian
language were published. An electronic textbook on the Russian language “Stylistics”

37

was edited in the region of Zaporizhya. The Culture of Speech” "Rhetoric” for 10th
and 11th grades was elaborated and introduced into the special course
“Rhethorization of the school language education” (methodology of teaching rhetoric
and culture of speech for senior students on the course on the Russian language). In
the region of Luhansk, teachers and lecturers of the Russian language, specialists of
the methodology centres of the cities and municipal districts took part in international
scientific practical conferences “Cultural aspect of teaching and studying literature
Modern theory and practice”, “International Dahl Conference”, “The third Chekhov
conference”, literature forum "Rereading Chekhov" and round table conferences
“Literary critics Yesterday, today, tomorrow”, and “Language culture of the youth
and the ways of its development in education of Luhansk" “Ukraine and Russia
Hohol unites us”.
In 2010 the Ministry approved “Regional special program of the development of the
Russian and Ukrainian languages in the region of Luhansk for 2011 - 2014”.
Regional annual competitions in creative works "V.I. Dahl is my fellow countryman”
and competitions and festivals dedicated to the works by M.L. Paustovskyi took
place.
In the region of Odessa an annual competition in nomination of “The Best teacher of
the Russian language and literature of the year” and the competitions for the experts
in the Russian literature and language take place.
In the region of Cherkasy the curriculum plan on the special course “The school of
eidetics" was elaborated, as well as the Russian language Orthography (developing
writing skills) and on the optional course "The Russian language for 3rd and 4th
grades.
The program of the development and use of the Russian language for 2007 - 2012 is
being realized in the region of Kharkiv. In accordance with the events envisaged by
the Program, a regional pupils' competition in literature is held for 8th and 11th
grades of general secondary schools with Russian language of teaching and a regional
competition on the Russian language, dedicated to the Day of written language and
culture. The 6th of June is a Day of the Russian language in the region of Kharkiv. In
2011 “Pushkin readings” dedicated the day of Pushkin's birth rook place for the first
time.
According to the Program of the development of the Russian language and culture in
Sevastopol for 2007-2011, adopted by Sevastopol city Council on the request of the
Education Board of the Sevastopol State administration, the Municipal Humanities
University of Sevastopol, the Institute of postgraduate education, inter-regional
competitions in the Russian language and literature take place every year. For this
period of time (2007 - 2010) more than 150 pupils from 15 regions of Ukraine
participated in the competition. The manual “Literary and historic regional

38

ethnography for schools” (based on the experience of the teachers of Sevastopol)
was published.
This year the Ministry has launched competition in the Russian language and
literature. From 2007 the Vasyl Stefanyk Precarpathian National University holds an
annual competition on the Russian language and literature, which hosts participants
from all over Ukraine.
A number of scientific journals for teachers of the Russian language are published in
Ukrainian schools (both in Russian and in Ukrainian) as well as a journal “Russian
Philology in Ukrainian schools" (in Russian) and “Russian Education” (in Russian.
Besides, in every region of Ukraine the Institutes of postgraduate pedagogical
education edit scientific journals, where teachers can find information about teaching
the Russian language and literature. The commission on Education, Scientific and
Methodological Council of the Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport
of Ukraine recommended publishing 20 manuals on the Russian language for higher
education establishments.
The Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv prepared and published a
"Ukrainian-Russian dictionary of real estate terminology, a manual for students "The
Russian language in ethno-linguistic perspective", “The Russian language as an
activity” The syntax of the modern Russian language”, “Contemporary Russian
spoken language” and “Morphemic structure and word building of the modern
Russian language”. The Kyiv National Linguistic University issued “The Practical
course of the Russian language for foreign students” and “A course book on practical
phonetics of the Russian language for foreign students”.
The Romanian language
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine created and
published curricula on the Romania language and reading for the 1st-4th grades and
on the Romanian language and literature for 5th - 11th grades for general secondary
schools which provide courses on the Romanian language.
In 2011, a new curriculum plan on the Romanian language and reading for the 1st-4th
grades of secondary schools was developed.
Special curriculum plans for optional courses "Manifestation of a semantic process in
a literary text", and "Editing" were elaborated as well as out-of-school courses
“Orthography and orthoepy of the Romanian language” and “Journalism” were
created.
In 2000—2011, the publication of textbooks in the Romanian language and literature
for 1st-11th grades and textbooks in other subjects in translation into the Russian
language was financed by the state budget. In 2008 "The Ukrainian - Romanian and
Romanian-Ukrainian Dictionary of terms for schools" was released. Besides, a
number of other additional textbooks and education programmes were recommended

39

to publish, among them – a course book for junior pupils "Popular Tales of a big
family" , which was published in 2010.
In occasion of the anniversary of a founder of the Romanian standard language Mihai
Eminesky, the authorities of the Transcarpathian region hold a competition in poetry
reciting among pupils of secondary schools with Romanian language of teaching, and
in April they organize a competition "The Romanian language is our cultural treasure.
The authorities hold a regional festival of the Romanian folk art in the municipal
districts of Rahiv and Tiachiv, where the Romanian minority reside. Art groups of
secondary schools of these regions give concerts as well as exhibitions of decorative
art. In the regions of Transcarpathia and Chernivtsi, the authorities hold competitions
in the Romanian language.
The branch office of the Institute of Innovation technologies in Chernivtsi determined
the main directions of its activities, they are: the coordination of methodical work of
pre-school, secondary and extracurricular education establishments, an experimental
work, holding scientific and practical seminars on promoting innovation technologies
and monitoring education. The branch office was constantly cooperating with the
team of authors to develop textbooks and manuals in the Romanian language. They
were also selecting the best school-leavers to study in higher education
establishments in Romania.
The department of the Romanian and classic philology at the Yuriy Fedkovich
National University of Chernivtsi provides courses on the Romanian language. The
number of lecturers on the staff is 13, among them there 7 lecturers who read the
Romanian language (2 PhDs, 5 assistants, 2 of whom presented their theses in
Romania).The Department of Romanian language and classic philology at the
National university of Uzhhorod provides courses on the Romanian language and
literature. The department employs 2 PhDs, 5 senior lecturers and a lecturer. The
department edited more than 15 manuals and textbooks, namely: "The modern
Romanian language", “Methodology of teaching the Romanian language” and “Folk
art”. The Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv prepared and published a
manual for students "The Romanian language" and a textbook “The Collection of
Romanian poetry of the XIX- XX centuries” (bilingual edition).
The Department of Romanian Philology and Translation at the State Humanities
University of Izmail employs 6 PhDs., associate professors and 1 lecturer. It provides
courses on the Romanian language.
The Slovak language
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine created and
published curricula on the Slovak language and literature for the 5th-11th grades for
general secondary schools with Ukrainian language of teaching.
In 2011, a number of creative teams were established to develop new curriculum
plans on the Slovak language and reading for 1st-4th grades of general secondary

40

schools with Ukrainian as a language of teaching which provide courses on the
Slovak language.
Education process involves adapted manuals and textbooks on the Slovak language
and literature for secondary schools developed in the Republic of Slovakia.
Every year Uzhorod hosts an art amateur festival, where the participants recite Slovak
poetry and folk tales "The Wonder of Tale”. The pupils of different ages, representing
the regions of a compact Slovak settlement participate in the competition. As a part of
the festival, there was held an exhibition of handicraft art, in which a number of folk
bands of secondary schools took part. The Department of the Slovak philology at the
Uzhhorod National University provides courses on the Slovak language and
literature. The Department employs 5 Doctor of Letters, Full Professors, 5 PhDs and
an assistant.
The Oles Honchar National University of Dnipropetrovsk elaborated curriculum
plans on the course "The Slovak language" as well as a number of methodical and
teaching aids: The Slovak language, “Exercises and texts”, “The modern Slovak
language”, a textbook “Morphology of the modern Slovak standard language”, a
manual on the course “The Slovak language as a second language”.
The Tatar language
Pre-school education establishments # 9 and 38 in the city of Melitopol in the
region of Zaporizhya organized groups of the Tatar culture.
4 cultural and education centers, Saturday and Sunday schools (120 pupils) in
the regions of Donetsk, Zaporizhya and the city of Kyiv provide courses on the Tatar
language. These education establishments use adapted programs and textbooks on the
Tatar language, literature and history for general secondary schools developed in the
Republic of Tatarstan (Russia).
The Turkish language
The Turkish language is taught in Saturday schools in the region of Mykolaiv
and in the city of Kyiv (51 pupils). Education process involves adapted manuals and
curriculum plans on the Turkish language for secondary schools developed in the
Republic of Turkey.
The Turkish language is also taught at the National University of “KyivMohyla Academy”, Kyiv National Linguistic University and at the Tavrida National
V.I. Vernadsky University.
The Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv launched a nationwide student
competition in the Turkish language in 2011.

The Hungarian language

41

The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine created and
published curricula on the Hungarian language and reading for the 1st-4th grades and
on the Hungarian language and literature for 5th - 11th grades for general secondary
schools which provide courses on the Hungarian language.
In 2011, a number of creative teams were established to develop new curriculum
plans on the Hungarian language and reading for 1st-4th grades of general secondary
schools.
In 2000—2011, the publication of textbooks in the Hungarian language and literature
for 1st-11th grades and textbooks in other subjects in translation into the Hungarian
language was financed by the state budget. In 2008 "The Ukrainian - Hungarian and
Hungarian-Ukrainian Dictionary of terms for schools" was released. Besides, a
number of other additional textbooks and education programmes were recommended
to publish, among them there is a course book for junior pupils ""Popular Tales of a
big family", that was published in 2010.
An annual competition in the Hungarian language is held in the Transcarpathian
region. Every January, general secondary school #10 named after Doyko Habora
runs a competition in the best singing the Hungarian national Anthem dedicated to
the Day of Hungarian culture. Every February, Kazinzi pupils’ competition in
reciting poetry and literary text is held. In April, the competition in reciting poetry
dedicated to the Day of Hungarian poetry takes place.
The Uzhhorod National University established the Humanities faculty with
Hungarian as a language of teaching. It comprises three departments: the department
of Hungarian Philology, the department of the history of Hungary and European
integration and the department of math and physics. The faculty employs 4 Full
Professors and associate professors and 8 senior lecturers. The centre of Hungarology
is affiliated to the Faculty.
The Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv prepared and published a
"Ukrainian-Russian-Hungarian dictionary of linguistic terminology".

The Czech language
Cultural and education centres, 5 Saturday and Sunday schools (112 pupils) in the
regions of Vinnutsia, Odessa, Zaporizhya, Mykolaiv and Cherkasy provide courses
on the Czech language. Education process involves adapted manuals and curriculum
plans on the Czech language for secondary schools developed in the Czech Republic.
The Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic gives financial support for the
general secondary school of Mykolaiv of the municipal region of Kozyatyn in the
region of Vinnutsia to provide for education aids: textbooks, manuals, audio-video
CDs, fiction books, etc. The library of Czech literature was established. The library

42

obtained its fund from the regional library of Vinnytsia named after Timiriazev and
the Foundation of fiction literature, which is enriched from the Czech Republic. With
the aid of the Czech cultural and education Society “Czhechohrad”, children can
study the Czech language in general secondary school of Novhorodka of the
municipal region of Melitopol in the region of Zaporizhya. Due to optional courses in
schools, children can take the course "The treasure of the Czech culture" for 6 years.
The Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv and the Ivan Franko National
University of Lviv prepared and published a "Ukrainian-Czech dictionary of
linguistic terminology" and a manual “The Culture of the Czech people: Traditions
and present days".
The Czech language can be studied in the Institute of Slavic Studies of Rivne, the
Slavic University of Kyiv, the State technology university of Zhytomyr, the National
University of “Kyiv-Mohyla Academy”, the Oles Honchar National University of
Dnipropetrovsk and in the Ivan Franko State University of Zhytomyr.
The latter university established The Czech-Ukrainian education centre (Centre of
Bohemia) on the base of the department of didactic linguistics and literary studies.
The centre aims to develop research into lingvo-didactics, the Czech language and
literature, historic analysis of the Czech diaspora in the regions of Volyn and
Zhytomyr, and to develop cultural and political relations between Ukraine and the
Czech Republic.
Paragraph 3 of Article 7 of the Charter
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport, education management
bodies take appropriate measures to promote mutual understanding between all the
language groups of the population, contribute to fostering respect, understanding and
tolerance for minority languages as one of the goals of education and training.
Education of students in a tolerant attitude to language, culture and beliefs of other
nations, nationalities and ethnic groups is carried out by education specialists.
Teachers are governed by the program developed by the Ministry "Basic guidelines
on education of the pupils of the 1st - 11th grades in general secondary education
establishments of Ukraine", which defines the main directions, principles, objectives,
subject matter of education work with pupils of each class. In particular, one of the
fundamental principles of education is defined as the principle of national focus. The
implementation of this principle when making education-upbringing process in
secondary schools is related to fostering in pupils culture of interethnic relations,
tolerance to the history, language, culture and beliefs of other nationalities living in
Ukraine and other countries.
To fulfil the basic objectives and principles of the program to foster tolerance,
including the language diversity, multiculturalism, the following list of topics for
education activities is included: for elementary school: "Everybody loves his own
land" "All the peoples of Ukraine live in harmony and peace." For the primary

43

school: "What is tolerance?", "Ukraine - multicultural state", "Different people different views," "Birth of truth, not the aggravation of relations", "Mutual
understanding What is it based on?, "People's Olympics Games" Games of the
world", for senior school: "Tolerance to all the ethnic groups and nationalities",
"Human values: understanding the main Truths", "Peace and harmony - the principal
condition of Earth and Humankind", "From culture of a personality to culture of
nations", "Common to mankind and national", "The main features of national moral
patterns", "National and ethnic traditions", "Ukraine and Europe", "From native to
foreign - from close to global", "We are different - we are equal", "Culture of
interethnic relations in multicultural area".
Under the guidelines on geography, history and ethics, the curriculum plans envisage
the courses on multicultural and religious diversity which underline the right to
uniqueness of each person, his/her inner world, respect to the children's rights to
freedom, happiness and overall development and fostering their abilities.
The Ministry Initiated updates to the content of history education, the review of
standards and programs, creation of a new generation of textbooks on the principles
of multiculturalism.
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held AllUkrainian seminars for experts from regional Institutes of Postgraduate Education (in
Uzhhorod, Kyiv, Lytsk, Simferopol). The participants of the seminar were informed
about the provisional edition of the European Union "Religious Diversity and
intercultural education" and approaches to multicultural education in Ukraine.
Ukrainian teachers took part in an international seminar "Cultural and religious
diversity through education" (in Georgia and France).
A handbook "In the Crimean home" and guidelines on course "Culture of
Neighbourhood" were published.
Every year in the Ukrainian Children's Centre "Young Guard" (in the city of Odessa)
an international contest festival of children's and teenagers' art "We all are your
children, Ukraine!" takes place. The contest festival aims to support gifted children
and youth, to develop intellectual and creative abilities of the Ukrainians and other
national minorities of Ukraine, to foster love to their Motherland, tolerance and
respect to cultural heritage of the Ukrainians and other national minorities.
Nationwide historical and literary competitions, "My Motherland - through the eyes
of children of different ethnic groups of Ukraine are held. The competition aims to
reveal gifted children and talented youth, to popularize cultural heritage of ethnic
groups on Ukraine, to foster with young people national consciousness, respect to
cultures and traditions of other peoples of the world and the feeling of dignity of a
citizen of a civilized European State. The participants are the representatives of
different ethnic groups living in our country (the Russians, the Belarusians, the
Bulgarians, the Armenians, the Poles, the Turks Meskhetians, the Georgians, the

44

Greeks, the Romani, the Crimean Tatars, the Gagauzians and others) and different
faiths.
In 2010/2011 the Ministry founded the International linguistic and literary contest for
pupils and students named after Taras Shevchenko.
With the aim to observe the Constitution of Ukraine and effective legislation, the
Ministry of Science and Education, Youth and Sport of Ukraine, Education Boards,
secondary general, extracurricular, professional vocational and higher education
establishments of all the levels take systematic measures against violation of people's
rights irrespective of their race, nationality or religious belief.
The Ministry of Science and Education, Youth and Sport of Ukraine, Education
Boards, secondary general, extracurricular, professional vocational and higher
education establishments of all the levels sent letters "On the measures against
xenophobia and racial discrimination among pupils and students" to engage internal
affairs authorities, law enforcement agencies on Family, youth and Sports,
nationalities and religions, as well as local and international organizations in charge
of preventing xenophobia, interethnic and racial intolerance, to take appropriate
measures.
With the aim to improve information and education work in the abovementioned
direction, the regional education centres of practical psychology and social work
elaborated guidelines "The essence of conflicts on the basis of racial intolerance, the
ways to prevent them" and held scientific methodical seminars on "The prevention of
xenophobia and racial discrimination among pupils and students" for the heads of
regional and district centres on Psychology and education specialists.
The Centres of Psychology of the departments and boards of education conducted
research to identify the level of aggressiveness among adolescents and tendency to
illegal actions and causes of xenophobia, racism and anti-Semitism in the Ukrainian
society.
The cooperation of education groups with the pupils 'and parents' self-government
was intensified to foster among pupils spirituality, moral culture, tolerant behaviour,
ability to live in a civil society.
For this purpose, secondary, vocational and extracurricular education establishments
carry out information and education activities:
Press conference, "We express our determination against all forms of racial hatred,
xenophobia and discrimination," "ethno-social processes in independent Ukraine",
"Democratic traditions in Ukraine";
Disputes "Informal group: how to treat this?", "The reasons for racial
discrimination?", "Do I have the right to despise a man of another race?", "My

45

favourite world without violence", "From contempt to hatred is only one step. How to
overcome this?";
Meeting of the Legal Centre (Clubs) "Youth against racism and xenophobia in
Ukraine", "sociability and tolerance - the basis of relations in modern society,"
"Racism on trial";
Speakers' competitions "Speech on Human Rights, "" Humanism - the future of
mankind, "Let's communicate in tolerance".
Education hours "Human life - the highest value. It is not defined by the language and
skin colour," "Let's live in friendship with all people," "I, you, he and she - together
we are a united family," " If you want to have a friend - learn to be a friend," “Mercy
and love to your neighbour ";
Parent's meetings on the topics: "Fostering national legal consciousness among
students", " Bad behaviour of the youth and adolescents in society," "Every person on
earth has the same rights, whatever nation it would belong to," "Preventing the spread
of xenophobic and racist manifestations among children and young people in
families;
Drawing contests "Ukraine - hospitality," "I want to have friends of different
nationalities," "The friendship has no bounds," "Children are all friends in the world";
Festivals of cultures of national minorities;
Video lectures "Earth is home for all", "Planet Dreams", "Man and World" and so on.
Every year in August in uts. Yasinia of the municipal district of Rakhiv of the
Transcarpathian region, The Congress of national Communities organize
"International children's camp "Sources of Tolerance", which is financed by the
Ministry of Culture of Ukraine, Eurasian Jewish Congress, International Foundation
"Revival", Danish Council for refugees and other sponsors. The event was attended
by about 2,200 children from more than 20 national minorities of Ukraine, Belarus,
Moldova, Armenia and Georgia as well as refugee children. Over 130 teachers
mastered the technique of international children's camp "Sources of Tolerance". The
event aims at fostering ethnic and confessional tolerance, combating xenophobia, the
formation of active citizenship among children of ethnic minorities, knowledge of
national diversity of Ukraine and other countries.
The Ukrainian Centre of extracurricular education traditionally runs cultural events,
that aims to promote culture and traditions of national minorities, namely:
international art contest "Talents of the third millennium" (in nomination of "creative
work and handicrafts" "folk vocalization" and "folk choreography"), International
youth festival of audio-visual art "Pure wells", International festival of children's
groups of folk dance "Inspiration of Khortyzia", All-Ukrainian festival of children's
dance "Spring colours", International festival of children's art dedicated to the Earth

46

Day, International festival "United Family", All-Ukrainian festival of creative art
"Christmas Holidays", All-Ukrainian festival of children’s amateur theatres
"Melpomene's masks", All-Ukrainian festival of children's dance, All-Ukrainian
festival of folk art, All-Ukrainian competition in auto - avia - rocket - vessel building
sport, All-Ukrainian pupils' competition in short-wave radio communication,
International colloquium "Space. " Person. Spirituality”, Children's Festival of Film
and Television" Rainbow "and the Contest for Young amateur photographers," We
are the children of Ukraine ", International Specialized Exhibition "The Art of
origami "and others. The participants in these activities are the children of Ukraine,
Russia, Belarus, Kazakhstan, Moldova and other countries. They can learn history,
traditions and culture of the country, which contributes to the formation of national
identity, patriotism, respect for national traditions and national values of the
Ukrainian people and other nations and peoples.
Children of minorities are permanent participants of national exhibitions "Know and
love your country", "Our research and work is to you, Ukraine", organized and
conducted by Ukrainian State Centre of extracurricular school education, which
promote the culture and traditions of their peoples.
The relevant work is carried out in all administrative and territorial units of the
country. Namely, education establishments in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
provide the course "Culture of Neighbourhood", which aims to promote patriotism,
tolerance, language culture, friendly relations between children of different
nationalities, to unite pupils' groups and to adapt children to multicultural society. In
the 2010/2011 academic year, 250 schools and 15 higher education establishments
provide this course. Methodical and practical seminars as well as the seminar on
conflictology for teachers of general secondary schools that implement the course
"Culture of Neighbourhood" are held in the municipal districts of "Rozdolne,
Nyzhniohirsk, Krasnohvardiisk and in the cities of Simferopol, Sudak, Evpatoriia,
Kerch and Krasnoperekopsk". In secondary schools, optional courses "Fundamentals
of Orthodox Culture in the Crimea" and "Fundamentals of Islamic culture in the
Crimea" were introduced. On the basis of the secondary school № 2, in the city of
Evpatoria, research and experimental work on the topic "School as a centre of
education of a tolerant person”.
In general secondary schools of the region of Vinnytsia there are special classes of
communication on the topics "Through pages of the national calendar" "Holokaust - a
tragic page in history", "Kind Neighbours", as well as round-table discussions for
pupils of 10th - 11th grades on the topics: "Interethnic conflicts", "Different
languages - one thought", "Inflorescence of thoughts - diversity of languages" and an
exhibition of information booklets "Millions of different "I" - together we are
Ukraine. (On national minorities of Vinnytsia). In groups of pupils of secondary
schools there was a documentary film viewing "New Neighbours" (about ethnic
relations in the region). In May 2010, pupil groups of secondary schools presented
the traditions of national minorities of Vinnitsa to the Day of Europe in Ukraine.

47

Traditionally, in February, the cultural and artistic event "Language palette" is held to
the Day of Mother Language.
On February 21, 2011, in the region of Donetsk the Department for Education and
Science of regional Administration organized the Festival of language and culture of
peoples living in the Donetsk region with a teleconference with representatives of
minority languages of Zaporizhya (the Bulgarians), Odessa ( the Moldovans and
Gagauzians), Chernivtsi (the Romanians) and the Crimea (the Crimean Tatars).
In Dnipropetrovsk a prominent place in the establishment of a national accord is
occupied by libraries in schools. Exhibitions of minority literature and reading
conferences: "No! to Racism in Ukraine "," We see the beauty in people's accord",
"The language of each people is unique" are held on the basis of libraries. Higher
education establishments constantly take measures against ethnic, religious and racial
intolerance, any acts of violence against foreign students; they also hold education
hours to prevent racist and xenophobic manifestations among students.
In the region of Zaporizhya the authorities held a seminar "Organization of education
process and psychological support to prevent xenophobic moods in society" (in the
city of Zaporizhya); they launched creative events "United Family", "They found a
common language. And what about you?", "Melitopol is an intercultural city "; held
meetings of district teaching unions "Tolerance as a basis for the development of
creative personality ", thematic lessons, "My country is my inspiration, lessons on the
topic "Remember! You are a person!, "Roundtable discussions on the topic "No to
the emergence of ethnic conflict"(Melitopol district); thematic lessons" Ethnic
composition of Ukraine", exhibition of literature in school libraries "Interesting
customs and traditions of the peoples of Ukraine "(Veselivsky district) and others. In
the city of Berdiansk with the participation of all education institutions of the city,
national associations, education institutions, every year a festival "Movlianochka"
takes place. A number of events to the Day of the native language (Russian,
Ukrainian, Bulgarian, German, Polish), were held, within which there were staged
folk rituals, readings works by different writers.
In the Ivano-Frankivsk region the Department of Education and Science of the
regional Administration annually held regional celebration "We all are your children,
Ukraine" for the development and revival of the national artistic traditions of national
minorities.
In the Poltava region secondary schools of Lokhvytsia district, where the largest
settlement of the Romani is situated, held round tables on the topic "The Romani in
Ukraine: yesterday and today" to the International Day of the Romani Holocaust.
In the Rivne region the Mochulysche school of the Dubrovytsky District held a
district seminar "Crystal night: Myth and Reality." A short essay on the history of
suffering of the Jewish people ", Lisivsk school held a reading conference on the
topic "The National and ethnic composition of the population of Ukraine, "Svarytsiv

48

school organized a thematic conference on the topic "National Minorities of the
Rivne region ". Schools conduct education hours' Tolerance: what is it?",
"Environment, customs and traditions of Belarus", "Tradition and the village life of
ethnic minorities", the exhibition-competition "Doll in the attire of the Slavic
peoples," the lessons of friendship "National holidays of Germany" competition in
dishes of national minorities.
Education establishments of the Khmelnytsk region held cultural and education
events to promote tolerance, mutual respect between all nationalities, round table
discussions of the development of languages and cultures of national minorities.
Scientific-practical conferences "Languages of national minorities: state, problems
and prospects", "State ethnic policy of Ukraine" were held for pupils and students of
the region.
The authorities of the region of Cherkasy hold annual cultural artistic events to the
international Day of Mother tongue "Language diversity", conferences and seminars
to the Day of Slavonic philology and culture, different cultural and education events,
that aim to foster respect for the culture, history, traditions and customs of different
national minorities (education classes, quizzes, festivals dedicated to Solom Alejxem,
M. Hohol), as well as creative meetings for teachers "Solom Alejxem and Ukraine",
"Travelling to Hohol's motherland, to the Poltava region".
In May 2011, in Chernihiv region in the municipal districts of Borziany, Schors,
Bobrovyzia pupils took part in the debates "What is xenophobia," "Human Rights
Protection in Ukraine" oral discussions "Tragedy of the Crimean Tatar people",
"History of Ukraine - Tragic pages, round tables discussions: "Turkic unity march", "
Minute of grief and unity", dedicated to the anniversary of deportation of Crimean
Tatars and other nationalities by national origin. Education establishments of the
municipal district of Seversk held a number of thematic classes on the topic "Peace to
the peoples of Ukraine", "Discover the future of the beauty in every language, in
every word", "Respect traditions, customs and ceremonies of other nationalities".
They also had a range of children's drawing competition "We are different, but we are
brothers", "The map of nationalities of Ukraine", discussions on the topics "Ukraine
is united", "The main features of the Ukrainian politics". Thematic cultural events,
special classes, lessons, lectures and conversations are held to the t International Day
of Holocaust of the Romani.
In the Chernivtsi region there is an annual competition of readers of the works by M.
Eminescu, round table discussions, scientific conferences, hours of intercourse,
extracurricular events, weeks of the Romani language, festivals of carols and folk
traditions, the holiday of spring "Mertsishor."The Statute of the specialized school №
41 in the city of Chernivtsi defines special days off to celebrate National Jewish
holidays.
In the city of Kyiv in 2010-2011 academic year, there were information classes on the
topic "Language is an ancient source of communication and inspiration", thematic

49

exhibition "Festival of spiritual unity," "Will I learn my golden language" and
seminars "Feel the spirit of your native language". The Kyiv Palace of Children and
Youth held thematic events with the leaders of pupils' self-government of general
education establishments that aim to promote tolerance, openness in communication:
Discussion Club «UNITIS» on "Tolerance or indifference" and "Let's hear each
other!", "Manifestations of intolerance in the media and the ways to overcome them"
in the International Festival for Children and Youth Journalism "Press-spring on the
slopes of the Dnipro". To the International Mother Language Day in February 2011,
the Kyiv National University of Culture and Arts in cooperation with the Department
of Education and Science prepared and published a collection of poems "Mother
Tongue! You are my inspiration ...». The collection includes poems and prose of
students of education establishments in different languages: Ukrainian, Russian,
Georgian, Modern Greek, etc.
Higher education establishments constantly take measures against ethnic,
religious and racial intolerance, any acts of violence against foreign students, they
also hold education hours to prevent racist and xenophobic manifestations among
students.
A sociological study "Xenophobic moods in Ukraine" was held to study the causes
and extent of crime among students.
Tolerance through education facilities provides an opportunity for students to learn
deeper the culture of different nations. The bases of multicultural education space in
higher education establishments are new subjects (courses), "Pedagogy of
Tolerance", "Methods of Pedagogy of Tolerance."
Students in higher education establishments enrich their knowledge obtained from the
course "Pedagogy of Tolerance" during classes of "Culture of communication",
"Culture of relations", "Culture communication", and “Gender psychology" and
more.
Classic universities, higher education establishments develop partnerships with
national cultural organizations to preserve language, culture and traditions of national
minorities. This cooperation occurs through various cultural and education events
(festivals, congresses, conferences, competitions in the knowledge of the native
language and culture, publishing literature in minority languages, textbooks (higher
education establishments of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, the Transcarpathia,
Chernihiv and Odessa regions and in the city of Kyiv).
To strengthen the work on preventing xenophobic and racist manifestations among
students of law faculties of universities, the authorities engage legal clinics that
provide free legal assistance and advice to students and citizens, as well as the
content of courses in faculties of law was revised.
By the initiative of the Centre of German Culture "Wieiderschtral" and the support of
the Federal Government of Germany, there was a contest for pupils and students

50

"Ukraine - Germany: Intercultural Dialogue ", the collection of works of the winners
was published.

Paragraph 4 of Article 7 of the Charter
In determining the education policy on minority languages, the State takes into
account the needs and wishes of those groups who use these languages.
In order to establish a permanent mechanism for consultation with the society, in
2009, the Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport created the Public
Council of heads of education programs of All-Ukrainian associations of national
minorities of Ukraine as an advisory and consultative body, the session is held once a
quarter. At the meetings of the Council, the participants tentatively consider drafting
laws and regulations, the experience of public organizations in providing education
programs (in 2010-2011 the discussion concerned the representatives of Gagauzian,
Greek and Jewish national minorities).
When preparing the Second Periodic Report, the Ministry of Education and Science,
Youth and Sport held consultations with representatives of minority languages
speakers, members of the Community Council, leaders and other representatives of
social organizations (see Annex 1).

Part 3
Implementation of commitments undertaken pursuant to ratified paragraphs of
Part III of the Charter.
3.1. Education (Article 8 of the Charter)
The State ensures the right of national minorities to education in their native
language, maintenance and development of ethnic culture. In addition, general
secondary schools with minority languages as languages of teaching create proper
conditions to study the state language.
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea, the Department of Education and Science of the regional, Kyiv
and Sevastopol city state administrations were involved in drafting the Report.

51

It is impossible to agree to the conclusion of the Committee of Experts that "the
obligation of the authorities to provide for the creation of a class or a school with
education in a minority language if certain objective conditions are met is currently
nor provided for in clear terms and no effective legal remedy seems to be available
against arbitrary refusals by the local authorities". (Subparagraph 152) The
abovementioned issues are strictly regulated by ""The Constitution of Ukraine, the
laws of Ukraine "On Languages in Ukrainian SSR", "On Ratification of European
Charter for Regional or Minority Languages", "On Pre-School Education", “On
General Secondary Education”, “On Extracurricular Education”, “On Vocational
Education”, “On Higher Education”, “On Local Self-Government in Ukraine”, and
"On Citizens' Appeals".
In places of compact settlement of national minorities, the citizens are provided for
the possibility to receive education in these languages. Language policy in education
is based on the principle of free choice made by parents, pupils and students of the
language of teaching as well as the right to learn a particular language. The Ministry
of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine also developed
recommendations for bilingual education. According to current legislation, education
establishments shall open groups and classes with certain languages of education on
the request of parents, pupils and students.
The main criterion for the introduction of minority teaching is "a sufficient number of
persons who evince their wish", but not the ethnic composition of the region.
Article 24 of the Constitution of Ukraine sets that : “citizens have equal constitutional
rights and freedoms and are equal before the Law. There shall be no privileges or
restrictions based on race, colour of skin, political, religious and other beliefs, sex,
ethnic and social origin, property status, place of residence, linguistic or other
characteristics".
The measures aimed to improve studying the Ukrainian language in education
establishments with minorities languages teaching are based upon "The Hague
Recommendations Regarding the Education Rights of National Minorities" and
pursuant to Article 5 of the Law of Ukraine "On Ratification of European Charter for
Regional or Minority Languages" these measure "are not considered those, that
prevent or pose any threat to preservation or development of the languages to which
the provisions of the Charter shall apply pursuant to the Law".
(Subparagraph 158 of the Report of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine and the
education authorities have not received any complaints about difficulties in importing
books for school libraries from abroad.
(Subparagraph 159 of the Report of the Committee of Experts)

52

In the years of 2007-2011, the state budget of Ukraine financed publication of a
significant number of new textbooks for schools with minority languages teaching.
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine has not received
any complaints about the quality of translated textbooks.
(Question 157 of the Committee of Experts)
In order to involve speakers of minority languages in the preparation of reforms in
the education sector, which are directly related to teaching / learning these languages
the Ministry established Public Council of heads of education programs of national
associations of national minorities of Ukraine.
(Question 160 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine as well
as other education authorities developed a coherent strategy for training teachers and
providing relevant training materials for education in minority languages.
Its basic principles are increasing the prestige of teacher's work, further reforming the
system and methods of selection of students of higher education establishments,
reforming advanced training teachers, etc. Detailed information is given below.
On the basis of the state standards, appropriate education facilities of
language learning and teaching are developed. The information apropos of this is
given above.

Paragraph a), subparagraph iii)
(Question 164 of the Committee of Experts)
Pre-school education in minority languages is offered in cases there are a sufficient
number of applicants. Parents can exercise the right of appeal against the actions of
local authorities under the Law of Ukraine "On citizens' appeals. During 2008-2011,
education authorities received one application for establishing pre-school education
establishment with the Crimean Tatar language of teaching. There were no other
complaints from parents.
The Belarusian language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents for providing pre-school education or its part in the
Belarusian language. In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue
will be considered and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and
the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority
languages”.

53

The pre-school education establishment # 21 in the city of Melitopol organized
the Belarusian cultural club, which promotes learning the Belarusian standard
language, folk songs, games, dances, etc.
(Question 167 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held a
consultation with the representatives of Social Groups of the Belarusians. They
reckon there is no need to provide pre-school education in the Belarusian language
(see Annex1).

The Bulgarian Language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents for providing pre-school education or its part in the
Bulgarian language. In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue
will be considered and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and
the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority
languages”.
In pre-school education establishments in the region of Odessa in areas of
compact Bulgarian settlement there were introduced appropriate forms and methods
of education of children, which promote learning the standard Bulgarian language,
folk songs, games, dances, etc.

The Gagauzian language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents for providing pre-school education or its part in the
Gagauzian language. In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue
will be considered and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and
the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority
languages”.
In pre-school education establishments in the region of Odessa in areas of
compact Bulgarian settlement there were introduced appropriate forms and methods
of education of children, which promote learning the standard Gagauzian language,
folk songs, games, dances, etc.

Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents for providing pre-school education or its part in the Modern

54

Greeak, Romani and Urum languages. In case we receive a sufficient number of
applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in accordance with the
Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European
Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
In pre-school education establishments in the region of Donetsk in areas of
compact Greek settlement there were introduced appropriate forms and methods of
education of children, which promote learning the standard Modern Greek language,
folk songs, games, dances, etc.

Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents for providing pre-school education or its part in the Hebrew
and Yiddish languages. In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the
issue will be considered and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine
and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or
Minority languages”.
In pre-school education establishments in the city of Kyiv (# 429, 764), in preschool establishment “Happiness”, in a private pre-school establishment “Mitsva”, in
pre-school establishments in the cities of Vinnutsia, Lviv, Luhansk, and in pre-school
establishment “Haia Mushka” in the region of Kherson, there were introduced
appropriate forms and methods of education of children, which promote learning the
standard Hebrew and Yiddish languages, folk songs, games, dances, etc.
The cities of Kirivohrad and Chernihiv have private education complexes "pre-school
– general secondary specialized school of I-III levels “Or Avner” with courses on the
Hebrew language, history of the Jewish people, its traditions and customs."

The Crimean Tatar language
As of 2010/2011 academic year there is one full-day pre-school education
establishment with the Crimean Tatar language of teaching (village Sary-Bash in the
municipal district of Pervomaisk) as well as 21 pre-school education establishments
with the Crimean Tatar language of teaching in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
According to parents’ applications, 545 children study in Crimean Tatar – everybody
who wishes to.
In connection with the application submitted by the deputy of the Verkhovna
Rada of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea Kolisnichenko M.P. on establishing the
pre-school education establishment with the Crimean Tatar language of teaching on
the base of a former secondary school # 4 in the city of Bilohirsk , the authorities

55

reconstructed the building with the assistance of the Turkish Administration for
Cooperation and Development. The pre-school establishment is to be commissioned
in 2011.

The Moldovan language
As of 2010/2011 academic year the region of Odessa has 16 pre-school education
establishments with the Moldovan language of teaching.
According to parents’ application, 1,065 children study in Moldovan – everybody
who wishes to.
The Bodies of State power as well the education authorities have not received
any complaints from parents about teaching in the Moldovan language.
(Question 180 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held a
consultation with the representatives of Social Groups of the Moldovans in the region
of Chernivtsi. There is no need to provide pre-school education in the Moldovan
language in this region (see Annex1).

The German language
As of 2010/2011 academic year the city of Mukachevo has 1 group in pre-school
education establishment with the German language of teaching.
According to parents’ applications, 22 children study in German – everybody who
wishes to.
The pre-school education establishment # 26 in the city of Melitopol in the
region of Zaporizhya organized groups of the German culture.
In case parents evince their wish, children will study German in pre-school
education establishments of Ukraine.
The pre-school education establishment # 26 in the city of Melitopol in the
region of Zaporizhya organized groups of the German culture.
The Bodies of state Power as well the education authorities have not received
any complaints from parents about teaching in the German language.

The Polish language

56

As of 2010/2011 academic year, in the city of Lviv there are 3 groups in a pre-school
education establishment and the private pre-school education establishment in the
city of Struiy (Lviv region) with the German language of teaching.
According to parents’ applications, 107 children study in Polish – everybody who
wishes to.
In the municipal district of Horodok of the region of Khmelnutsk, where Polish
native speakers live, there is a group of Polish language on the basis of the Center for
children's upbringing, attended by 30 children of pre-school age.
In 2 pre-school education establishments in the region of Chernivtsi there were
introduced appropriate forms and methods of education of children, which promote
learning the standard Polish language, folk songs, games, dances, etc.
The Bodies of state Power as well the education authorities have not received
any complaints from parents about teaching in the Polish language.
(Question 182 of the Committee of Experts)
The authorities of other regions with compact Polish settlement have not received any
complaints about teaching in Polish.

The Russian language
As of 2010/2011 academic year, Ukraine has 1012 pre-school education
establishments with the Russian language of teaching.
According to parents’ applications, 171,713 children study in Russian – everybody
who wishes to.
The Bodies of state Power as well the education authorities have not received
any complaints from parents about teaching in the Russian language.

The Romanian language
As of 2010/2011 academic, year the regions of Transcarpathia and Chernivtsi have 45
pre-school education establishments with the Romanian language of teaching.
According to parents’ applications, 2,444 children study in Romanian – everybody
who wishes to.
The Bodies of state Power as well the education authorities have not received
any complaints from parents about teaching in the Romanian language.

57

The Slovak language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents for providing pre-school education or its part in the Slovak
language. In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be
considered and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law
of Ukraine “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority
languages”.

The Hungarian language
As of 2010/2011 academic year, the region of Transcarpathia has 70 pre-school
education establishments with the Hungrian language of teaching. According to
parents’ applications, 3,451 children study in Hungarian – everybody who wishes to.
The Bodies of state Power as well the education authorities have not received
any complaints from parents about teaching in the Hungarian language.

Paragraph b), Subparagraph iv
Elementary education in minority languages is provided in case there are a sufficient
number of applicants. In accordance with the Program of economic reforms "Wealthy
society, competitive economy, effective state", there started a renovation of the
content standards of general secondary education. The Ministry of Education and
Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine elaborated a new State standard of elementary
general education, approved by the Decree of the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine #
462 of April 29, 2011.

(Subparagraph 189 of the Report of the Committee of Experts)
The abovementioned subparagraph contains inaccuracies. Pursuant to the Law
of Ukraine “On General Secondary Education”, "general secondary education is a
mandatory basic constituent of continuous education" (Article 3). The Law also
determines the levels of general secondary education, which shall be provided for by
education establishments: “elementary general education, basic secondary education,
full general secondary education” (Article 9).

The Belarusian language
In 2009 the education management body in the state district of Shevchenko in
the city of Kyiv received an application from a citizen on providing his child with

58

education in the first grade in the Belarusian language. Since, there were no other
applicants for studying in Belarusian or learning Belarusian, the abovementioned
applicant received an explanation of the effective Law.
In case we receive a sufficient number of applications for offering elementary
education in Belarusian or providing courses on Belarusian, the issue will be
considered and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law
of Ukraine “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority
languages”.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
Belarusian language.

The Bulgarian Language
The gymnasium of Bolhrad of the region of Odessa provides advanced courses on the
Bulgarian language.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
Bulgarian language.
As of 2010/2011 academic year, in the region of Odessa there are 2 general
secondary education establishments with the Bulgarian, Russian and Ukrainian
languages of teaching, where a significant part of subjects are read in Bulgarian.
According to parents’ applications, 65 children study in Bulgarian in
elementary school, 2,794 children study the Bulgarian language in the region of
Odessa and in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea – everybody who wishes to.
The Gagauzian language
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
Gagauzian language. In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue
will be considered and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and
the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority
languages”.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year in region of
Odessa in general elementary schools, 482 pupils study the Gagauzian as a subject –
everybody who wishes to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
Gagauzian language.

59

Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
Modern Greek, Romani and Urum languages or studying these languages. In case we
receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved
in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On
Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year, in the
region of Donetsk and the Autonomous Republic of Crimea in general elementary
schools, 618 students study the Modern Greek as a subject – everybody who wishes
to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
Modern Greek, Urum or Romani languages.
Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
Hebrew and Yiddish languages or studying these languages.In case we receive a
sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in
accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification
of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic, year in regions
of Odessa, Zaporizhya, Chernivtsi and the city of Kyiv, in general elementary schools
497 pupils study the Yiddish as a subject – everybody who wishes to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
Hebrew or Yiddish languages or studying these languages.
The Crimean Tatar language
As of 2010/2011 academic year, in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea there are 15
general secondary education establishments with the Crimean Tatar language of
teaching, 23 education establishments with the Crimean Tatar and Russian languages
of teaching and 39 education establishments with the Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian
languages of teaching.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year in region of
Donetsk and the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, the region of Kherson and in the
city of Sevastopol in general elementary schools 2,126 pupils study the Crimean
Tatar language as a subject – everybody who wishes to.

60

During a reception by the deputy of the Verkhovna Rada of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea Illiasov R.I., in 2010, one of the parents raised a question of
opening the first grade with the Crimean Tatar language of teaching in general
secondary school of 1st-2nd levels of accreditation in the municipal district of
Lenino. Since there have only been 3 parents' applications, it does not give enough
reasons for opening the class with the Crimean Tatar language of teaching, but from
September 2011, an optional course on the Crimean Tatar language is to be
introduced.
(Question 199 of the Committee of Experts)
In the 2010/2011 academic year in the region of Kherson, everybody who
wishes, can study the Crimean Tatar language. The information on education
methodic support of the Crimean Tatar language is given above.
The Moldovan language
As of 2010/2011 academic year in region of Odessa there are 6 general secondary
education establishments with the Moldovan language of teaching, 6 education
establishments with the Moldovan and Ukrainian languages of teaching and 1
education establishment with the Moldovan and Ukrainian languages of teaching.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year in the region
of Odessa in general elementary schools, 1,177 pupils study the Moldovan language
as a subject – everybody who wishes to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
Moldovan language or studying this language.
The German language
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
German language. In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue
will be considered and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and
the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority
languages”.
With regard to the parents’ applications, in the 2010/2011 academic year, in Ukraine
in state and communal general elementary schools 88,091 pupils study the German
language as a subject – everybody who wishes to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
German language or studying this language.
The Polish language

61

As of 2010/2011 academic year, in regions of Ivano-Frankivsk, Lviv and Khmelnytsk
there are 5 general secondary education establishments with the Polish language of
teaching,
education establishment with the Polish and Ukrainian languages of
teaching and 1 education establishment with the Polish and Ukrainian languages of
teaching.
With regard to the parents’ applications, in the 2010/2011 academic year, 525 pupils
study in Polish, in the regions of Odessa, Zhytomyr, Khmelnytsk and Chernivtsi and
the city of Kyiv in general elementary secondary schools, 806 pupils study the Polish
language as a subject – everybody who wishes to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
Polish language or studying this language.
The Russian language
As of 2010/2011 academic year, Ukraine has 1,149 communal general secondary
education establishments with the Russian language of teaching, 1,373 secondary
education establishments with the Russian and Ukrainian languages of teaching, 23
secondary education establishments with the Russian and Crimean Tatar languages of
teaching, 39 secondary education establishments with the Russian , Crimean Tatar
and Ukrainian languages of teaching, 1 secondary education establishment with the
Russian, Ukrainian and Romanian languages of teaching, 1 secondary education
establishment with the Russian, Ukrainian and Moldovan languages of teaching, 87
private secondary education establishments with the Russian language of teaching, 5
private secondary education establishments with the Russian and Ukrainian
languages of teaching.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic yearб 257,443
pupils study in Russian, in state general elementary secondary schools , 4,222 pupils
study the Russian language in private general secondary schools, 367,427 pupils
study the Russian language as a subject in communal general secondary schools, 933
pupils study Russian as a subject in private general secondary schools – everybody
who wishes to.
Parents’ complaints and applications
In 2009 the education management body in the region of Luhansk received an
application from 2 parents for providing their children with education in the first
grade in the Russian language in general secondary school #11 of Volodarsk (the city
of Sverdlovsk). After considering these applications, classes with the Russian
language teaching were opened.
In 2010 Education and Science management body of the regional
administration of Donetsk received applications from the parents from the cities of
Avdiivka, Horlivka, Dokuchaevsk, Enakievo and Hartsyzk for opening 1st grades

62

with the Russian language of teaching in general secondary education establishments
with the Ukrainian language of teaching. Such classes were opened.
In 2009 the education management body in the region of Luhansk received an
application from parents for providing their children with education in the first grade
in the Russian language in education complex of Luhansk (specialized school of the
1st degree # 30). After considering their applications, such class was opened.

The Romanian language
As of 2010/2011 academic year, in regions of Transcarpathia and Chernivtsi, there
are 82 general secondary education establishments with the Romanian language of
teaching, 14 education establishments with the Romanian and Ukrainian languages
of teaching and 1 education establishment with the Romanian and Ukrainian
languages of teaching.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year in general
elementary secondary schools 6,207 pupils study in the Romanian language and 277
pupils study Romanian as a subject – everybody who wishes to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
Romanian language or studying this language.

The Slovak language
In 2010/2011 academic year, specialized secondary school of I-III degrees # 21 with
advanced courses on foreign languages, with the Ukrainian and Slovak languages of
teaching, continues its work in the city of Uzhhorod ( the Transcarpathian region).
With regard to parents' application, 113 pupils study in Slovak in elementary school
of other general secondary education establishments of Transcarpathian region, as
well as 35 pupils study Slovak as a subject – everybody who wishes to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
Slovak language or studying this language.

The Hungarian language
As of 2010/2011 academic year, in region of Transcarpathia, there are 70 general
secondary education establishments with the Hungarian language of teaching,
including
66 communal education establishments and 4 private education
establishments. There are 31 communal education establishments with the Hungarian

63

and Ukrainian languages of teaching and 1 private secondary education establishment
with the Hungarian and Ukrainian languages of teaching.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year in general
elementary secondary schools 5,604 pupils study in the Hungarian language and 600
pupils study Hungarian as a subject – everybody who wishes to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents for providing elementary education or its part in the
Hungarian language or studying this language.

Paragraph c), Subparagraph iv
Secondary education in minority languages is provided in case there are a sufficient
number of applicants. Final examination in general secondary schools (state final
attestation) is held in the language of teaching.

The Belarusian language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing secondary education or its part in
the Belarusian language or studying this language. In case we receive a sufficient
number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in accordance with
the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European
Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.

(Question 222 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held a
consultation with the representatives of Social Groups of the Belarusians. They
reckon there is no need to provide secondary education in the Belarusian language
(see Annex 1).

The Bulgarian Language
As of 2010/2011 academic year, in the Odessa region there is 1 general secondary
education establishment with the Bulgarian and Ukrainian languages of teaching,
and 1 education establishment with the Bulgarian, Russian and Ukrainian languages
of teaching.

64

With regard to the parents’ applications, 65 pupils study in the Bulgarian language
(only in elementary school), 10,148 pupils study the Bulgarian language as a subject
in communal general secondary schools, 764 pupils study Bulgarian as an optional
subject or in out-of-school hours in the regions of Zaporizhya, Kirovohrad, Kyiv,
Mykolaiv, Odessa, the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and in the city of Kyiv. 21
pupils study Bulgarian as an optional subject or in out-of-school hours in private
schools – everybody who wishes to.
The gymnasium of Bolhrad of the region of Odessa provides advanced courses on the
Bulgarian language.
In the region of Zaporizhya there is a regional Ukrainian-Bulgarian multilateral
lyceum of Prymorsk. For the last 3 years this school has increased the number of
classroom hours of the Bulgarian language as a compulsory subject starting from the
7th grade. In senior classes of philological type the number of classroom hours of
Bulgarian has increased to 4 hours per week.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents or pupils for providing secondary education or its part
in the Bulgarian language.

(Question 224 of the Committee of Experts)
For the last 3 years the number of pupils who study the Bulgarian language has
increased in the region of Zaporizhya. 2008/2009 academic year – 590 pupils (316 –
in urban areas, 274 – in rural areas), 2010/2011 academic year – 729 pupils (327 – in
urban areas, 402 – in rural areas). The table concerns the districts and the cities of the
region, where the Bulgarian language is taught:

2009/2009 academic year
Region Name

2010/2011 academic year

The number of children

The
number
children

Urba
n area

Urb
an
area

Rura
l
area

total

Rur
al
area

In
total

of

65

(Berdiansk

66

-

66

75

-

75

Melitopol

5

-

5

-

-

-

District
Berdiansk

of

-

69

69

-

100

100

District
Pryazovske

of

-

125

125

-

222

222

District
Prymorsk

of

245

64

309

252

74

326

District
Yakymivka

of

-

16

16

-

6

6

316

274

590

327

402

729

total

For the previous two academic years there was an inter-school optional course on the
Bulgarian language (10 pupils) in the municipal district of Yakymivka. In 2010/2011,
the optional course was not opened, because no pupils' applications were submitted.
This academic year general secondary school of Volodymyr provides an optional
course on the Bulgarian language (6 pupils).
The number of classroom hours corresponds to the curriculum plans, chosen by a
certain education establishment.

(Question 225 of the Committee of Experts)
Teaching materials are adapted to all levels of general secondary education.
There are no translated textbooks in the Bulgarian language, since secondary schools
do not provide teaching in Bulgarian.

The Gagauzian language
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents or pupils for providing secondary education or its part
in the Gagauzian language. In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the
issue will be considered and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine
and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or
Minority languages”.

66

With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year, in the
region of Odessa in general secondary schools 1,418 pupils study the Gagauzian
language as a subject – everybody who wishes to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents or pupils for providing secondary education or its part
in the Gagauzian language or studying this language.

Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing secondary education or its part in
the Modern Greeak, Romani and Urum languages or studying these languages. In
case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and
resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On
Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year, in the
regions of Donetsk, Odessa, Kherson, the cities of Kyiv and Sevastopol and the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea in general secondary schools 3,379 pupils study the
Modern Greek as a subject, 610 pupils study Modern Greek as an optional subject, 19
pupils study Urum in out-of-school hours in the Donetsk region, 38 pupils study
Romani – everybody who wishes to.
In the Donetsk region there are 2 specialized schools with advanced courses on the
Modern Greek language, history, culture of Greece and the Greeks of Ukraine:
School # 46 of Staryi Krym in the city of Mariupol (195 pupils study modern Greek,
19 pupils study Urum in out-of-school hours), school # 8 of Sartana in the city of
Mariupol (705 pupils study Modern Greek, 15 pupils study Romani in out-of-school
hours) and school # 94 “Ellada” in the city of Kyiv (271 pupils study Modern Greek).
School of I-III degrees of Maloianisol of the municipal district of Volodar of the
Donetsk region provides out-of-school hours on the Romani language (23 pupils).
The Bodies of state Power as well education authorities have not received any
complaints from parents or pupils about education in the Modern Greek, Romani and
Urum languages or studying these languages.

Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing secondary education or its part in
the Hebrew and Yiddish languages or studying these languages. In case we receive a

67

sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in
accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification
of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year, in the
regions of Donetsk, Odessa, Kharkiv, Dnipropetrovsk, Zaporizhya, Chernivtsi, the
Autonomous republic of Crimea, and the city of Kyiv in general secondary schools
1,915 pupils study Hebrew as a subject, 13 pupils study Hebrew as an optional
subject, 1,159 pupils study Hebrew as a subject in private schools, 142 pupils study
Hebrew in out-of-school hours – everybody who wishes to.
In the cities of Dnipropetrovsk, Kryvyi Rih, Dniprodzerzhynsk and Odessa there are
general secondary schools with advanced courses on Hebrew, the history of the
Jewish people and Jewish traditions.
In the city of Zaporizhya there is a communal Jewish school-gymnasium "Alef" and a
private specialized school “Habad Lybavych” with advanced courses on English and
Hebrew. Due to a variable component of curriculum plans, the following subjects
were introduced: “The Tradition of the Jewish people”, “The History of the Jewish
people”, “The Jewish literature”, “Geography of Israel”.
Under the Synagogue in the city of Ivano-Frankivsk, there is a Jewish private school
"Or Avner" with courses on Hebrew.
In the city of Luhansk, there is a secondary school “Beit-Menahem” with courses on
Hebrew.
In the city of Lviv there is a private general school-gymnasium “Brothers of Israel”.
Private secondary specialized school of Mykolaiv "Or-Menahem" provides courses
on the history of the Jewish people.
Pupils of 5th-11th grades study Hebrew as a subject in a private education complex
“pre-school institution - specialized school of I-III degrees "Habad" with advanced
courses on Hebrew and English in the city of Kherson.
The specialized general school # 21 in the city of Chernivtsi with courses on Jewish
culture, all 172 pupils of 5th-11th grades study Hebrew, history and traditions of the
Jewish people. In 10th-11th grade pupils study the Jewish literature and the subject
"The Catastrophe of the European Jewry".
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents or pupils for providing secondary education or its part
in the Hebrew or Yiddish languages or studying these languages.

(Question 233 of the Committee of Experts)

68

The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Jews. They
reckon there is no need to provide secondary education in the Yiddish language (see
Annex 1).

The Crimean Tatar language
As of 2010/2011 academic year, in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea there are 15
general secondary education establishments with the Crimean Tatar language of
teaching, 23 education establishments with the Crimean Tatar and Russian languages
of teaching and 39 education establishments with the Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian
languages of teaching.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year, in region of
Donetsk and the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, the region of Kherson and in the
city of Sevastopol in general secondary schools 14,642 pupils study the Crimean
Tatar language as a subject, 5,097 pupils study Crimean Tatar in out-of-school hours
– everybody who wishes to.
Parents’ and pupils’ complaints and applications
In 2008 the Ministry of Education and Science of the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea received a collective application from the parents of the pupils of the 9th
grade for providing a course on Crimean Tatar in general secondary school of I-III
degrees of Voykivka of the municipal district of Pervomaisk. After considering the
application, the class was opened. In 2009 there was a similar collective application
from the parents of the pupils of the 5th grade of general secondary school of
Dzhankoi. The issue was resolved as well.

The Moldovan language
As of 2010/2011 academic year in region of Odessa, there are 6 general secondary
education establishments with the Moldovan language of teaching, 6 education
establishments with the Moldovan and Ukrainian languages of teaching and 1
education establishment with the Moldovan and Ukrainian languages of teaching.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year, in the
region of Odessa in general secondary schools 3,877 pupils study in the Moldovan
language, 2,038 pupils study Moldovan as a subject, 275 pupils – study Moldovan as
an optional subject or in-out-of-school hours – everybody who wishes to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents or pupils for providing secondary education or its part
in the Moldovan language or studying this language.

69

The German language
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents or pupils for providing elementary education or its part
in the German language. In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the
issue will be considered and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine
and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or
Minority languages”.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year,in Ukraine in
state and communal general elementary secondary schools, 614,729 pupils study the
German language as a subject, 1,174 pupils study German in schools of other
property categories, 4,767 study German in private schools – everybody who wishes
to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents or pupils for providing secondary education or its part
in the German language or studying this language.

The Polish language
As of 2010/2011 academic year in the regions of Ivano-Frankivsk, Lviv and
Khmelnytsk there are 5 general secondary education establishments with the Polish
language of teaching, 1 education establishment with the Polish and Ukrainian
languages of teaching and 1 education establishment with the Polish and Ukrainian
languages of teaching.
With regard to the parents’ applications, 1,357 pupils study in the Polish language,
8,338 pupils study the Polish language as a subject in communal general secondary
schools, in the regions of Vinnutsia, Volyn, Donetsk, Zhytomyr, Ivano-Frankivsk,
Kyiv, Kirovohrad, Luhansk, Lviv, Odessa, Rivne, Ternopil, Kherson, Khmelnytsk,
Chernivtsi and in the city of Kyiv. 3,516 pupils study Polish as an optional subject or
in out-of-school hours, 19 pupils study Polish in private schools, 13 pupils –study
Polish as a subject or in out-of-school hours – everybody who wishes to.
With the aim to satisfy the needs of the pupils in studying Polish, in 2010/2011
academic year, general secondary school of I-III degrees # 3 of Ivano-Frankivsk
increased the number of classroom hours of Polish from 12 to 13 hours per week.
This year another class with the Polish language of teaching is to be opened (15
pupils).
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents or pupils for providing secondary education or its part
in the Polish language or studying this language.

70

(Question 237 of the Committee of Experts)
As stated above, there were no complaints concerning this issue. During the
consultations, the representatives of Polish public organizations claimed that all the
applications for education in Polish or studying it were satisfied. The information on
the availability of teaching materials is given above.

The Russian language
As of 2010/2011 academic year, Ukraine has 1,149 communal general secondary
education establishments with the Russian language of teaching, 1,373 secondary
education establishments with the Russian and Ukrainian languages of teaching, 3
communal general secondary schools with the Russian and Moldovan languages of
teaching, 23 secondary education establishments with the Russian and Crimean Tatar
languages of teaching, 39 secondary education establishments with the Russian ,
Crimean Tatar and Ukrainian languages of teaching, 1 secondary education
establishment with the Russian, Ukrainian and Romanian languages of teaching, 1
secondary education establishment with the Russian, Ukrainian and Moldovan
languages of teaching, 1 secondary education establishment with the Russian,
Ukrainian and Bulgarian languages of teaching, 4 general secondary schools of other
property categories with the Russian language of teaching, 87 private secondary
education establishments with the Russian language of teaching, 4 private secondary
education establishments with the Russian and Ukrainian languages of teaching and 1
general secondary school with the Russian, Ukrainian and English languages of
teaching.
With regard to the parents’ applications, in the 2010/2011 academic year, in general
secondary schools 685,806 pupils study in the Russian language, 464 pupils study in
Russian in schools of other property categories, 9,769 pupils study in Russian in
private general secondary schools, 1,242,184 pupils study Russian as a subject,
1,269 pupils study Russian as a subject in schools of other property categories, 2,232
pupils study Russian in private schools. 131,471 pupils study Russian as an optional
subject or in out-of-school hours, 877 pupils study Russian in private schools –
everybody who wishes to.
Parents’ and pupils’ complaints and applications
In 2008 the education management body in the region of Zaporizhya received a
complaint from a parent of a pupil of 6th grade of one of the general secondary school
of Zaporizhya. He was discontent at the fact that his son had to study Russian. After
considering this complaint, the pupil was exempted from studying Russian.

71

The following year the education management body in the state municipal
administration of Sevastopol received applications from 4 parents for providing their
children with education in Russian. Since there are 57 general secondary schools
(out of 67) with the Russian language of teaching and 9 schools with Ukrainian and
Russian languages of teaching, the applicants were given an official explanation.
In 2010, the chief management body of education and science in Kyiv state
administration received applications from parents of the pupils of the 6th grade of
school # 302 for providing their children with courses on the Russian language. The
authorities made a decision to open extracurricular classes.

The Romanian language
As of 2010/2011 academic year, in regions of Transcarpathia and Chernivtsi there are
82 general secondary education establishments with the Romanian language of
teaching, 14 education establishments with the Romanian and Ukrainian languages
of teaching and 1 education establishment with the Romanian and Ukrainian
languages of teaching.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year, in general
secondary schools 18,866 pupils study in the Romanian language, 578 pupils study
Romanian as a subject, 289 pupils – study Romanian as an optional subject or in-outof-school hours – everybody who wishes to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents or pupils for providing secondary education or its part
in the Romanian language or studying this language.

(Question 240 of the Committee of Experts)
Pupils and their parents have the right to choose the language of teaching. As
stated above, there were no complaints concerning this issue. Thus, teaching is the
State language does not hamper education in Romanian.

The Slovak language
In 2010/2011 academic year, specialized secondary school of I-III degrees # 21 with
advanced courses on foreign languages with the Ukrainian and Slovak languages of
teaching, continues its work in the city of Uzhhorod (the Transcarpathian region).
With regard to parents' application, 113 pupils study in Slovak in secondary school of
other general secondary education establishments of the Transcarpathian region, as
well as 214 pupils study Slovak as a subject, 246 – as an optional subject – everybody
who wishes to.

72

Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any complaints from parents or pupils about providing secondary education or its part
in the Slovak language or studying this language.

(Question 246 of the Committee of Experts)
At present the authorities do not plan to introduce secondary education in
Slovak in the Zakarpatya region, since parents wish that their children studied in
Ukrainian from the 5th grade in school # 21 and the Slovak language were taught as a
subject. In future this issue may be considered with regard to parents’ applications.

The Hungarian language
As of 2010/2011 academic year, in region of Transcarpathia there are 70 general
secondary education establishments with the Hungarian language of teaching,
including 66 communal education establishments and 4 private education
establishments. There are 31 communal education establishments with the Hungarian
and Ukrainian languages of teaching and 1 private secondary education establishment
with the Hungarian and Ukrainian languages of teaching.
With regard to the parents’ applications in the 2010/2011 academic year, in general
secondary schools 15,126 pupils study in the Hungarian language, 300 pupils study
in Hungarian in private schools, 1,091 pupils study Hungarian as a subject, 4 pupils
study Hungarian in private schools, 390 pupils study Hungarian as an optional subject
or in-out-of-school hours – everybody who wishes to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any complaints from parents or pupils about providing secondary education or its part
in the Hungarian language or studying this language.

Paragraph d), Subparagraph iv

The Belarusian language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing technical or vocational education or
its part in the Belarusian language or studying this language. In case we receive a
sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in
accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification
of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.

73

(Question 250 and 254. (box) of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of Social Groups of the Belarusians. They
reckon there is no need to provide technical and vocational education in the
Belarusian language (see Annex 1).

The Bulgarian Language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing technical or vocational education or
its part in the Bulgarian language or studying this language. In case we receive a
sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in
accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification
of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.

(Question 250 and 254. (box) of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Bulgarians.
They reckon there is no need to provide technical and vocational education in the
Bulgarian language (see Annex 1).

The Gagauzian language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing technical or vocational education or
its part in the Gagauzian language or studying this language. In case we receive a
sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in
accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification
of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.

(Question 250 and 254. (box) of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Gagauzians.
They reckon there is no need to provide technical and vocational education in the
Gagauzian language (see Annex 1).

74

Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing technical and vocational education
or its part in the Modern Greeak, Romani and Urum languages or studying these
languages. In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be
considered and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law
of Ukraine “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority
languages”.

(Question 250 and 254. (box) of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of Social Groups of the Greeks. They reckon
there is no need to provide technical and vocational education in the Modern Greek,
Urum and Romani languages (see Annex 1).

Hebrew and Yiddish
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing technical and vocational education
or its part in the Hebrew and Yiddish languages or studying these languages. In case
we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and
resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On
Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.

(Question 250 and 254. (box) of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Jews. They
reckon there is no need to provide technical and vocational education in the Hebrew
or Yiddish languages (see Annex 1).

The Crimean Tatar language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing technical or vocational education or
its part in the Crimean Tatar language or studying this language. In case we receive a
sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in
accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification
of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.

75

(Question 250 and 254. (box) of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Crimean Tatars.
They reckon there is no need to provide technical and vocational education in the
Crimean Tatar language (see Annex 1).

The Moldovan language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing technical or vocational education or
its part in the Moldovan language or studying this language.In case we receive a
sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in
accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification
of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.

(Question 250 and 254. (box) of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Moldovans. They
reckon there is no need to provide technical and vocational education in the
Moldovan language (see Annex 1).

The German language
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents or pupils for providing technical and vocational
education or its part in the German language. In case we receive a sufficient number
of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in accordance with the
Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European
Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
In vocational schools German is taught with regard to parents’ and pupils’ wish.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents or pupils for providing technical and vocational
education or its part in the German language or studying this language.

(Question 250 and 254. (box) of the Committee of Experts)

76

The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Germans. They
reckon there is no need to provide technical and vocational education in the German
language (see Annex 1).

The Polish language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing technical or vocational education or
its part in the Polish language or studying this language. In case we receive a
sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in
accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification
of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.

(Question 250 and 254. (box) of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Poles. They
reckon there is no need to provide technical and vocational education in the Polish
language (see Annex 1).

The Russian language
As of 2010/2011 academic year, there are 35 vocational education establishments
with the Russian language of teaching, and 100 vocational education establishment
with the Russian and Ukrainian languages of teaching.
With regard to the parents’ and pupils’ applications, 16,023 pupils study in the
Russian language and 37,599 pupils study in Russian and Ukrainian in vocational
schools – everybody who wishes to.
Education establishments and education management bodies have not received
any applications from parents or pupils for providing technical and vocational
education or its part in the Russian language or studying this language.

The Romanian language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing technical or vocational education or
its part in the Romanian language or studying this language. In case we receive a
sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in

77

accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification
of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.

(Question 250 and 254. (box) of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Romanians.
They reckon there is no need to provide technical and vocational education in the
Romanian language (see Annex 1).

The Slovak language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing technical or vocational education or
its part in the Slovak language or studying this language. In case we receive a
sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in
accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification
of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.

(Question 250 and 254. (box) of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Slovaks. They
reckon there is no need to provide technical and vocational education in the Slovak
language (see Annex 1).

The Hungarian language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils for providing technical or vocational education or
its part in the Hungarian language or studying this language. In case we receive a
sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in
accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification
of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.

(Question 250 and 254. (box) of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Slovaks. They
expressed their proposal for opening Hungarian-speaking groups in the lyceum of

78

service sector # 11 of Berehiv and in other vocational schools, technical schools,
lyceums and colleges of the region with regard to applications.

Paragraph e) Subparagraph iii
According to the legislation of Ukraine, university education or other levels of
education may be provided both in the State language and in minority languages, as
well as students can obtain a possibility to study these languages in universities or
others higher education establishments.
Under the decrees adopted by the Ministry of Science and Education, Youth
and Sports of Ukraine, in 2010 and 2011, the applicants who completed their full
secondary education in Russian or other minority languages and who wish to enroll at
higher education establishments, can take independent external exam (tests),
translated into the language of teaching if they wish (with the exception of tests on
the Ukrainian language and literature and foreign languages).

(Question 258 and 259 (box) of the Committee of Experts)
In terms of abovementioned, education policy on regional or minority languages is
comprehensive. A better proficiency in the State language will be achieved without
jeopardizing the possibility of higher education for speakers of regional or minority
languages. Higher education in these languages remains available for students of
national minorities.

The Belarusian language
In 2010, the Institute of Philology at the Taras Shevchenko National University
of Kyiv enrolled the first students who would study the Belarusian language. There
are 14 first-year students: 8 of them obtain free of charge education.

(Question 260 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of Social Groups of the Belarusians. There is
no need to provide higher education in the Belarusian language or to open groups
with the Belarusian language of teaching (see Annex1).

The Bulgarian Language

79

It is possible to study the Bulgarian language at the Taras Shevchenko National
University of Kyiv, the Odessa National Mechnikov University , the National
University of “Kyiv-Mohyla Academy,
the Ivan Franko National University of
Lviv , the Oles Honchar National University of Dnipropetrovsk , the K.D. Ushynsky
South-Ukrainian Pedagogical university, the State Humanities University of Ismail,
the National University of Zaporizhya, the State Pedagogical University of
Berdiansk, the State Pedagogical University of Melitopol, the Petro Mohyla Blacksea
State University and in Pedagogical College of Bilhorod-Dnistrovskyi.

The Gagauzian language
Higher education is not provided in the Gagauzian language, nor there are
courses on this language in higher education establishments. In 2013, the Institute of
Philology at the Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv is to enroll the first
students who will study the Gaugazian language.

(Question 264 of the Committee of Experts)
Although, we are planning to provide advanced training for teachers of the
Gagauzian language in 2011 at the University of Komrat (Gagauzia – an autonomous
formation in Moldova).

Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum
The Modern Greek language is taught in the Taras Shevchenko National University
of Kyiv, the Kyiv National Linguistic University, the Tavrida National V.I.
Vernadsky University, The State University of Mariupol , the Institute of Tourism of
Donetsk, the Slavic University of Kyiv, the Odessa National Mechnikov University ,
the Ivan Franko National University of Lviv, the State Technical University of PreAzov and at the Institute of Social Education of Donetsk.

Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
The Hebrew language is taught in the Solomon University and in women's
pedagogical college "Bet-Khana" (the city of Dnipropetrovsk).

(Question 269 of the Committee of Experts)
The Yiddish language is not available in higher education establishments.

80

The Crimean Tatar language
The Crimean Tatar language is taught at the Tavrida National V.I. Vernadsky
University and The Crimean State Engineering Pedagogical University.
At the department of the Crimean Tatar language and literature at the Tavrida
National V.I. Vernadsky University, there are 180 students, 105 of them are full-time
students.
At the department of Philology at the Crimean State Engineering Pedagogical
University students are educated by the training program "Philology" and obtain
specialization “The Crimean Tatar language and literature”. At the Faculty of the
Crimean Tatar and Turkish linguistics there are 316 students who take a bachelor
degree program, among them there are 132 part-time students. 85 students take a
specialist degree program, among them there are 42 part-time students, and 8 students
take a master degree program.

The Moldovan language
At present, higher education is not provided in the Moldovan language, nor
there are courses on this language in higher education establishments. The
Mechnikov National University of Odessa, on the initiative of the Ukrainian nationalcultural Moldovan Association, supported by the Ministry of Education and Science,
Youth and Sport of Ukraine, is considering enrolling a group of students who will
study the Moldovan language.

The German language
More than 40 higher education establishments, in all the administrative units, provide
courses on the German language.
The National Technical University “Kharkiv Politechnic Institute” established the
German Technical Faculty. Its activity is based upon a long-term productive
cooperation of the departments of NTU "KPI" with their counterparts at the
universities of Germany and Austria. Their cooperation is preconditioned by the need
of the businesses, organizations and higher education establishments for experts in
modern technology of projecting, production and running production machines and
mechanisms, automated electro-technical complexes, electronic systems. They also
need experts who speak excellent German and can participate in scientific technical
cooperation.

81

General engineering training is carried out in Ukrainian, and a special one - in
German, which is the main principle of education of specialists at the Faculty. It
allowed organizing education process with the aid of foremost professors from
Germany as well as making use of German technical teaching materials.
Graduates obtain their diplomas not only at NTU "KPI" but also at the University of
Magdeburg. They also obtain a certificate of a translator from the German language
and are recommended to obtain a job at the enterprises which make use of facilities,
produced by foremost German firms or produce facilities to export into the countries
of Western Europe. They can get a job at the firms, which need translators of special
technical texts.
Specialist trained in the framework of the program “Science to Business” by
Siemens, have an opportunity to take personal part in the production of brand new
products and creation of engineering solutions in various branches of the world
economy.
The National Polytechnic University of Odessa established the similar German
Technical Faculty.
On the initiative of the staff of the department of German language, the National
University of Uzhhorod established the Center of the German language (partner of
the Goethe Institute of Kyiv), where students take advanced courses on the German
language and obtain international certificate.
The Polish language
The Polish language is taught at the Taras Shevchenko National University of
Kyiv, the National University of “Kyiv-Mohyla Academy, the Ivan Franko National
University of Lviv ,the Vasyl Stefanyk Precarpathian National University, the Lesia
Ukrainka National University of Volyn, the Ivan Franko State Pedagogical University
of Drohobych , the Oles Honchar National University of Dnipropetrovsk ,the Dal’
Pedagogical University, the National University of Khmelnytsk, the Mykola Hohol
State University of Nizhyn, the Mykola Ohienko National University of KmianetsPodilsk, the State Humanities University of Rivne, the National University of Water
Management and Nature Use, the National University of Ostroh Avademy, the
International Economic-Humanities University named after academician
S.Demianchuk, the Institute “Open International University of Human Development
“Ukraine”, the Agricultural University of Sumy, the State Pedagogical University of
Berdiansk, the University of Management and Business of Berdiansk, the Volodymyr
Vynnychenko State Pedagogical University of Kirovohrad, the State technological
University of Zhytomyr.
The Oles Honchar National University of Dnipropetrovsk established the
Ukrainian-Polish center in 2008. The similar center was founded in the State
University of Mariupol.

82

The Russian language
33,455 students obtain higher education in Russian in higher education
establishments of the I-II levels of accreditation, and 217,649 in higher education
establishments of the III-IV levels of accreditation.
More than 40 higher education establishments in all the administrative units
provide courses on the Russian language.
On the requests of a number of representatives of public organizations and
higher education establishments, which enroll students to be trained by education
program "Philology" – “Russian language and literature”, under the decree of the
Ministry of education, Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine, in 2011 the Russian
language will be included into the independent external examination for those schoolleavers who wish to enroll at higher education establishments of Ukraine.
The Romanian language
85 students obtain higher education in Romanian in the higher education
establishment of the I-II levels of accreditation – the Pedagogical College at the Yuri
Fedkovych National University of Chernivtsi.
The Romanian language is taught at the Yuri Fedkovych National University
of Chernivtsi, the Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, the State
Humanities University of Izmail, the State Technological University of Zhytomyr and
pedagogical colleges of the Zakarpatya and Chernivtsi regions.
(Question 269 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine has not
received any applications for establishing the subsidiary of the Vasyl Holdis Western
University, as well as no licenses have been submitted.

The Slovak language
The Slovak language can be studied at the Slavic University of Kyiv, the
Oles Honchar National University of Dnipropetrovsk and at the Ivan Franko National
University of Lviv, the Zakarpatya subsidiary of the Slavic University of Kyiv and
the Institute of Slavic Studies of Rivne.
The Hungarian language
87 students obtain higher education in Hungarian in higher education
establishments of the I-II levels of accreditation, and 795 – in higher education
establishments of the III-IV levels of accreditation.
The Uzhhorod National University established the Humanities faculty with
Hungarian as a language of teaching. It comprises three departments: the department
of Hungarian Philology, the department of the history of Hungary and European
integration and the department of math and physics. There are 284 students studying
at the Faculty (235 – full-time students and 49 – part-time students).

83

There is the Ferenz Rakozi II Hungarian Institute of Zakarpatya (private
higher education establishments of the III level of accreditation) in the city of
Berehovi. There are 847 students studying at the Institute (522 – full-time students
and 325 – part-time students).
Students can obtain education in Hungarian in the Zakarpatya subsidiary of
the Slavic University of Kyiv (24 students), the Humanities Pedagogical College of
the State University of Mukachevo (127 students), the Medical College of Berehovi
(76 students), the College of Culture and Art of Uzhhorod (69 students) and the State
Agricultural vocational school of Mukachevo (41 students).
The Hungarian language is taught at the State Technological University of
Zhytomyr.
Paragraph f) Subparagraph iii
The Belarusian language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from the citizens for providing adult education or its part in evening
schools in the Belarusian language. In case we receive a sufficient number of
applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in accordance with the
Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European
Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
As a part of continuing education the Belarusian language, culture, history,
traditions and customs are studied by children and adults in 4 Saturday and Sunday
schools (46 students) in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea and the region of
Odessa.
(Question 282 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of Social Groups of the Belarusians. They
reckon there is no need to provide adult education in the Belarusian language.
The Bulgarian Language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from the citizens for providing adult or continuing education or its part
in evening schools in the Bulgarian language. In case we receive a sufficient number
of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in accordance with the
Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European
Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
As a part of continuing education the Bulgarian language, culture, history,
traditions and customs are studied by children and adults in education centers,
Saturday and Sunday schools (189 students) in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea
in the regions of Odessa, Zaporizhya and the cities of Kyiv and Sevastopol.

84

(Question 282 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Bulgarians.
They reckon there is no need to provide adult education in the Bulgarian language.
The Gagauzian language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from the citizens for providing adult or continuing education or its part
in evening schools in the Gagauzian language. In case we receive a sufficient number
of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in accordance with the
Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European
Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
(Question 282 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Gagauz. They
reckon there is no need to provide adult education in the Gagauzian language.
Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from the citizens for providing adult or continuing education or its part
in evening schools in the Modern Greek, Romani and Urum languages. In case we
receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved
in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On
Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
As a part of continuing education, the Modern Greek language, culture,
history, traditions and customs are studied by children and adults in 26 education
centers, Saturday and Sunday schools (817 students) in the Autonomous Republic of
Crimea in the regions of Odessa, Dnipropetrovsk, Donetsk, Zaporizhya, Luhansk,
Mykolaiv, Kharkiv, Kherson, Cherkasy, Chernihiv and the city of Kyiv.
(Question 282 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of Social Groups of the Greeks. They reckon,
there is no need to provide adult and continuing education in the Modern Greek,
Urum and Romani languages.
Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from the citizens for providing adult or continuing education or its part
in evening schools in the Hebrew and Yiddish languages. In case we receive a
sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in
accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification
of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.

85

As a part of continuing education, the Hebrew and Yiddish languages, culture,
history, traditions and customs are studied by children and adults in 86 education
centers, Saturday and Sunday schools (Hebrew is studied in all the administrative
units of Ukraine, and Yiddish – in the regions of Vinnytsia, Zhytomyr, Zaporizhya,
Kyiv, Lviv, Odessa, Kharkiv, Cherkasy, Chernivtsi, Chernihiv and in the city of
Kyiv). 200 pupils study the Yiddish language, and 2,398 pupils study the Hebrew
language.
(Question 282 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Jews. They
reckon, there is no need to provide adult and continuing education in the Hebrew or
Yiddish languages.
The Crimean Tatar language
In the 2010/2011, academic year, with regard to submitted applications, as a
part of continuing education of adults in evening schools, 91 citizens obtain education
in Crimean Tatar – everybody who wishes to.
As a part of continuing education, the Crimean Tatar language is studied by
children and adults in 2 Saturday and Sunday schools (46 students) in the regions of
Zaporizhya and Kherson.
The Moldovan language
In the 2010/2011 academic year, with regard to submitted applications, as a
part of continuing education of adults, in evening schools, 94 citizens obtain
education in Moldovan – everybody who wishes to.
As a part of continuing education, the Moldovan language is studied by
children and adults in 2 Saturday and Sunday schools (35 students) in the region of
Odessa.
The German language
The German language is studied as a subject as a part of adult education in
evening schools.
As a part of continuing education, the German language is studied by children
and adults in 38 education centers, Saturday and Sunday schools (953 students) in the
Autonomous Republic of Crimea in the regions of Odessa, Ivano-Frankivsk, Poltava,
Donetsk, Luhansk, Mykolaiv, Kharkiv, Kherson, Cherkasy and Chernihiv.
(Question 282 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Germans. They
reckon there is no need to provide adult education in the German language.
The Polish language

86

Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from the citizens for providing adult or continuing education or its part
in evening schools in the Polish language. In case we receive a sufficient number of
applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in accordance with the
Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European
Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
As a part of continuing education, the Polish language is studied by children
and adults in 105 education centers, Saturday and Sunday schools (5,455 students) in
all the administrative units of Ukraine, except for the region of Poltava.
(Question 282 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine held
consultations with the representatives of public organizations of the Poles. They
reckon there is no need to provide adult education in the Polish language.
The Russian language
In the 2010/2011 academic year with regard to submitted applications, as a
part of continuing education of adults, in evening schools 26,070 citizens obtain
education in Russian – everybody who wishes to.
As a part of continuing education, the Russian language is studied by children
and adults in 10 education centers, Saturday and Sunday schools (178 students) in the
regions of Vinnytsia, Ivano-Frankivsk, Rivne and Ternopil.
The Romanian language
In the 2010/2011 academic year with regard to submitted applications, as a
part of continuing education of adults in evening schools, 580 citizens obtain
education in Romanian – everybody who wishes to.
The Slovak language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from the citizens for providing adult or continuing education or its part
in evening schools in the Slovak language. In case we receive a sufficient number of
applications, the issue will be considered and resolved in accordance with the
Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On Ratification of European
Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
(Question 282 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry held a range of consultations with the representatives of public
organizations of Slovaks. They reckon there is no need to provide adult education in
the Slovak language.
The Hungarian language

87

In the 2010/2011 academic year with regard to submitted applications, as a
part of continuing education of adults in evening schools, 300 citizens obtain
education in Hungarian – everybody who wishes to.
As a part of continuing education, the Hungarian language is studied by
children and adults in a cultural and education center (15 students) in the city of
Kyiv.
Paragraph g)
Elements of history and culture of the peoples whose representatives lived and live in
Ukraine, are studies in the courses secondary schools: "History of Ukraine", "World
History", "Geography", "World Literature", "Music Art" " Visual Arts "," Art Culture
". These courses are obligatory for all the pupils.
In recent years Ukraine has paid great attention to multiculturalism. In the current
conditions the main task of a teacher is shift emphasis to something in common that
unites the citizens of Ukraine of different nationalities. Cultural diversity is necessary
to understand our own historical progress. The key issues for school teachers of
history are cultural and historical image, national Identity and cultural diversity.
The elements of history and important facts from the past of the Belarusian,
Bulgarian, Gagauzian, Greek, Jewish, Crimean Tatar, Moldovan, German, Polish,
Russian, Romanian, Slovak and Hungarian peoples are studied by students in close
correlation with the history of the Ukrainian people.
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine is constantly
improving curricula and history textbooks.
Textbooks, published in recent years, focus special attention to the everyday history.
They portray multicultural image of the nineteenth - early twentieth centuries on the
background of interethnic relations. It was urban culture that demonstrated the
multicultural essence of Ukraine. Today students need to know how the
representatives of different ethnic groups co-existed in a multi-ethnic city, what
ethno-social background was, how inter-ethnic cooperation was growing.
For example, a teacher can show that Russian, Polish, Jewish and Ukrainian artists
found a common language in Kyiv literary and artistic society of the early twentieth
century. Liberal Russian press - newspaper "Kievskie otklyky" published the first
Ukrainian article by Serhiy Efremov in 1906.
Authors of textbooks emphasize the positive features and points of cooperation and
endeavour to find mutual compromises. They show a complex problem and the ways
it was resolved, at least in part. The same concerns the evaluation of political figures
and scholars. For example, P. Struve was a spokesman for the Russian assimilation of
Ukrainians, but at the same time, he was a prominent social scientist, philosopher and
economist. N. Berdyaev - the greatest philosopher of Russian Christian movement

88

was a Kyivan, but he was indifferent to Ukrainians, although his brother S. Berdyaev
was an active Ukrainian journalist and public figure.
Hereby, the international nature of the urban artists is revealed, national features of
artists and their creations are underlined. For example, German architects I. Shtrom,
P. and G. Schleifer, A. Shille worked in Kyiv. They were creating Kyiv classicism
and modern art. Italians V. Beretti and O. Beretti and P. Sparro were the builders of
the most gorgeous classicist buildings in Kyiv of the nineteenth century. A special
place was occupied by Polish and Jewish architects. Today an average Ukrainian
knows them as creators of the works of the Ukrainian architectural school of the past,
because time perceives these objects as national cultural works.
The course of world history and the history of Ukraine provides studying the history
of Holocaust - the most tragic pages of Jewish history, one of the events of recent
history that influenced the development of the continent and the world in general
(topic "Concentration camps and mass extermination of people, Holocaust ").
In order to motivate students to high moral values and orientations, patriotic and civic
consciousness, respect for national traditions and cultures of Ukraine, the schools of
the country implemented an optional course "Diversity of religions and cultures of
the world" for students of the 1st-11th grades.
According to the experts of the International Foundation «Revival» and European
research associations, which in 2010 analysed the state of modern textbooks in
Ukraine's history and world history, ethnic correctness is inherent in all the textbooks
in history. But in the future we are planning to edit textbooks, which would pay much
more attention to ethnic issues, in order to eliminate historical gaps of other
ethnicities.
In the courses on economic and social geography of Ukraine, pupils of the 9th grade
of secondary schools study the section "The population of Ukraine," including the
topic "National and ethnic composition of the population." Pupils must know the
history of the formation of the Ukrainian nation, the national composition of
population of Ukraine and separate regions, to have an understanding of the political
nation, indigenous peoples and national minorities and ethnographic groups of
Ukrainians, Ukrainian diaspora and its geography.
In the course "World Literature" pupils study the works of various writers and poets:
Russian - Ivan Krylov, O. Pushkin, M. Lermontov, M. Hohol, M. Nekrasov,
F.Tyutchev, F.Dostoevsky, L.Tolstoy, A. Chekhov, M. Bulgakov, O.Block,
A.Akhmatova, B. Pasternak, M. Sholokhov, S. Marshak, O.Tvardovsky;
German and Austrian - J. W. Goethe, F. Schiller, R.M Rilke, G. Bell, G. Heine, F.
Kafka, B. Brecht, P. Zyuskinda;
Greek - Myths of Prometheus and Hercules, Homer, Aesop, Tirteya, Archilochus,
Sappho, Anacreon, Aeschylus, Sophocles, Hungarian - Petofi S;

89

Polish - A. Mickiewicz, Jewish - Sh. Aleichem.
The system of school art and aesthetic education is aimed at studying the whole
picture of the world and, above all - the world culture, man's world and at fostering
liberal and systemic thinking among the youth. Art and aesthetic education in school
aims to promote learning national and global cultural and artistic experience by the
pupils, and create conditions and opportunities for active participation of young
people in artistic and communicative processes of modern society.
One of the important principles of art education in schools is a fundamental unity of
the universal (multicultural), national (state) and regional (ethno-local, regional)
components of the education with national focus, which fosters patriotic and civic
consciousness among pupils. In the process of studying the objects of artistic and
aesthetic world, cultural approach to the analysis of works of art is appliesd, which
involves penetration of the nature of signs and symbols into so-called speech codes.
Comprehending and understanding artistic images is a creative process of empathy
and interpretation, which is of actively dialogical character. That is "Dialogue of
Cultures" that enables individuals not only to contribute to national and universal
values, but also to gain independence in the world of culture, get involved in its
creation and at the same time, to develop themselves as subjects of culture. Hereby,
the dialogue of cultures is not the only form of communication in cross-cultural
environment, but it also promotes pupils' awareness of relations between the types of
cultures - historical, national, regional, and personal.
Education field "Art" in elementary school is represented by the subjects "Music Art"
and "Visual Arts" or by an integrated course "Art," which is studied in the 1st-4th
grades. The general section of the 4th grade "Music unites the world" and its
components - education topic, "Music knows no boundaries," which is studied in
terms of the course "Music Art" is interesting in terms of multicultural orientation.
The abovementioned issue analyses, in particular, the interconnection of music of the
Slavic peoples (Ukrainian, Russian Belarusian), and the features of music of Baltics,
the Caucasus, Central Asia, Europe and the world. Among the recommended works
in the education program for elementary school there are compositions by the
following composers: Russian:
M.Glinka, P. Tchaikovsky, M. Rimsky-Korsakov, S.Prokofiev, D. Shostakovich, S.
Rachmaninov, K. Myaskovsky, I. Dunaevsky, R. Shchedrin, D. Kabalevsky, M.
Blanter, G. Gladkov;
Armenian: A. Khachaturian;
Polish: F. Chopin, German: Y.S. Bach L.Beethoven, R. Schumann, Y. Brahms;
Hungarian: Z Koday, as well as folk songs and dances: Russian, Belarusian, Polish,
German, Bulgarian and more.

90

Education field "Aesthetic culture" in the elementary school covers such education
subjects as "Music Art" (grades 5th-8th), "Visual Arts" (5th-7th grades), "Art
Culture" (Grade 9th).
In the process of mastering the subject content of "Music Art" from 5th to 8th grade,
pupils listen to and perform the recommended works by various composers, including
Russian: M. Glinka, P.Tchaikovsky, O. Borodin, M. Rimsky-Korsakov,
M.Mussorgsky, S. Rachmaninov, I. Stravinsky, S. Prokofiev, D.Shostakovich,
O.Scriabin, G. Sviridov, R. Shchedrin, A. Schnittke, I. Dunaevsky, V. Basner, A.
Alexandrov, D. Tuhmanova, V. Soloviev-Syedoy, B. Grebenshchikov, A. Kozlov, L.
Quint, Y.Chychkova, G. Gladkov, O. Zacepin et al.;
German: Y.S. Bach, H.-V. Gluck, L. Beethoven, Y. Brahms (Hungarian themes);
Polish: F. Chopin and M. Ohinsky;
Hungarian – F. Liszt.
In the process of mastering the subject "Visual Arts" topic 2 "Man and the objective
world" in the 6th grade, pupils extend their ideas about the spiritual and material
cultural heritage, national features of art work and life, topic 2 "Objective
environment" in the 7th grade, pupils consider the particular cultural and national
traditions in the design environment.
In high school the course "Art Culture" is studied in 10th-11th grades at the standard,
academic and main levels. The cultural course "Art Culture" in high school is a kind
of artistic and ideological culmination of school art education, which consists of two
parts: Ukrainian (Grade 10) and foreign (Grade 11) cultures, which are studied on the
basis of comparative studies ("Ukraine - Europe, Ukraine - World "). This approach
enhances the education potential of the course through the implementation of
multicultural component and the simultaneous preservation of the national education
priorities.
Notably, the program in the artistic culture of the standard level (Grade 11) considers,
among other topics: "Sculpture - a hymn to man" (samples of works of ancient Greek
sculptors), "Russian painting", "Russian Ballet", in the context of the theme "Art - a
mediator between cultures "- examples of the interpenetration of cultures of different
national pictures of the world.
The program of the artistic culture of the academic level in the 11th grade in the
section "European artistic culture" includes such topics as: "Greece", "Germany",
"Russia" and the section VII, "The space of culture" includes such topics as: the
meaning of any culture - its "conductivity" in terms of other cultures, as well as
prominent foreign artists in Ukraine are studied.
The program of the artistic culture of the main level in the 11th grade is based upon a
deeper analysis of the culture of Greece, Germany, as well as studying such topics as:
"Bulgaria" (Cyril and Methodius), "Poland" (F. Chopin), "Romania" (carpet art),

91

"Hungary" (folk danced, F. Liszt, I. Kalman), "Belarussia" (band "Pesniary"),
"Russia" (icon painting, painting, ballet, theatre, cinema), "Decorative handicraft of
Muslims", "Ukrainian-Russian relations".
Along with the above outlined invariant component of cultural education in school,
there is its variable component that is implemented through the introduction of
optional courses and out-of-school courses. Thus among the ethnological and
multicultural programs, recommended by the Ministry of Education Science, Youth
and Sports of Ukraine, there is a program "Decorative Applied Arts" (1st-11th
classes). The program includes such topics as: "Toys of the peoples of the world",
"The main feature of tracery of various nations", "Guards of various nations of the
world", "Ritual symbols", "Divergent features of carpet handicraft of different
regions of Ukraine", "Divergent features of ceramics of different regions of Ukraine",
"Divergent features of embroidery of different regions of Ukraine", "Divergent
features of wood decorative art of different regions of Ukraine", "Ethno-design", 8th
grade. Among the topics of the course there are: "Decorative patterns in different
regions of Ukraine", "Ornaments of the world", “The main types of Greek, Egyptian
ornaments , “Ornaments of the East ", " The characters in folk art", "Musical
Studies", 7th grade. This optional course reveals the music culture of Poltava. Based
on the program, pupils can study musical culture and its ethnic characteristics of any
region of Ukraine.
Extension of variable component of cultural education in schools through elaboration
of new programs, optional courses and extracurricular courses will enable teaching
staffs to make use of ethno-local and cultural features and to make use of
multicultural approaches to teaching art subjects.
In the Chernivtsi region the textbook "History of my native land" for 7th-11th grades
(translated into Romanian as well) and the manual "Story from the history of my
native land" were published. In several schools of the region, pupils study "History of
the Poles of Bukovina." Multicultural issues in the region are reflected in the manuals
on the literature of the native land and geography of the Chernivtsi region, published
in the period of 2000-2011.
At the Ivan Franko State University of Zhytomyr, the Department of History of
Ukraine established the Research Centre for Jewish Studies for more detailed study
of the characteristics of the history of the Jewish minority of Ukraine. The Centre
aims to coordinate scientific programs on the Jewish issues in Volyn - Zhytomyr to
create tolerant cultural environment among pupils and students, to perpetrate
scientific investigations into modern Ukrainian-Jewish relations and to hold scientific
and practical conferences on history and culture of Jews of the region. The Centre
held international scientific conference on the topic "Jews in Volyn: history and
present days" in March 2009, international scientific conference for teachers and
students on the topic "Historical lessons of Holocaust and intercultural relations (to
the 70th anniversary of the WWII)" in October 2009 and international scientific and

92

practical conference on the topic "XX century – ethno-cultural aspect and Holocaust"
in October 2010.
Paragraph h)
The Ministry of Science and Education, Youth and Sports of Ukraine,
education management bodies provide basic and further training of the teachers to
implement those of paragraphs a to g of the Charter.

The Belarusian language
As stated above, the Institute of philology of the Taras Shevchenko National
University of Kyiv opened the Center of the Belarusian language and culture in 2009,
which develops curriculum plans to train experts in the Belarusian language. There
was the first admission of the students, who would be teachers of the Belarusian
language, if necessary.
The Bulgarian Language
The Odessa National Mechnikov University, the Oles Honchar National
University of Dnipropetrovsk , the K.D. Ushynsky South-Ukrainian Pedagogical
university, the State Humanities University of Izmail, the State Pedagogical
University of Berdiansk, and the Pedagogical College of Bilhorod-Dnistrovsk train
teachers for general secondary education establishments.
The cooperation between education management bodies of the Odessa region
and the Association of Bulgarians of Ukraine and the Congress of Bulgarians of
Ukraine give teachers of the Bulgarian language and literature a possibility to
advance their professional skills in Bulgaria.
The Gagauzian language
In 2006 the Institute of Philology at the Taras Shevchenko National University of
Kyiv established teacher of Gagauzian training courses .
on the basis of the University of Komrat (Gaugasia – an autonomous
formation in Moldova).
The Institute of Philology at the Taras Shevchenko National University of
Kyiv is considering enrolling the first students who could be teachers of the
Gaugazian language in 2013.

Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.

93

The State University of Mariupol, the Taras Shevchenko National University
of Kyiv, the Slavic University of Kyiv, National Linguistic University of Kyiv, the
Mechnikov National University of Odessa, the Ivan Franko National University of
Lviv, the Vernadsyi Taurida National University train experts in the Modern Greek
language.
Further teacher training of Modern Greek is in the center of attention thanks
to the active stance of the Federation of Greek communities of Ukraine. Every year,
teachers advance their professional skills in higher education institution of Greece
and Cyprus. In recent years more than 50 teachers of Ukraine have participated in
different exchange programs.
Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
In the Dnipropetrovsk region the women's pedagogical college "Bet-Khana"
trains elementary school teachers and teachers of music for schools, where Jewish
children study.
The Crimean Humanities University (Yalta) trains teachers of Hebrew for
general secondary schools
In 2010, the Jewish Forum of Ukraine organized and held summer camp “Di
idishe voh” (Jewish week) in the city of Kyiv. For a week, 30 teachers of Sunday
schools from 15 cities of Ukraine studied the Jewish languages, folklore and the
Jewish literature.
The Crimean Tatar language
The Crimean State Engineering Pedagogical University, the Tavrida National
V.I. Vernadsky University and the Pedagogical Vocational School of Simferopol
train teachers of Crimean Tatar language for general secondary education
establishments. The Crimean Republican Institute of postgraduate education and the
Institute of Postgraduate Education of the Sevastopol Municipal Humanities
University provide for further teacher training courses.
The Moldovan language
The National University of Uzhhorod, the Y. Fedkovych National University of
Chernivtsi, the K.D. Ushynsky South-Ukrainian Pedagogical university, the State
Humanities University of Izmail, the Pedagogical College of Bilhorod-Dnistrovsk
and the regional Odessa Institute for Advanced Teacher Training train teachers of
Moldovan for general secondary education establishments.
The German language
34 higher education establishments of the III-IV levels of accreditation in all the
administrative units of Ukraine, classical pedagogical universities train teachers of

94

German for general secondary schools, as well as all the regional Institutes of
Postgraduate Education provide for further teacher training courses.
The Polish language
The Taras Shevchenko National University of Kyiv, the Ivan Franko National
University of Lviv, the V. Stefanyk Precarpathian National University, the Lesia
Ukrainka Volyn University, the Pedagogical University of Drohobych, the State
University of Kamianets-Podilskyi, the National University of Khmelnytsk train
teachers of Polish for general secondary schools. As well as the regional Institutes of
Postgraduate Education of Volyn,’Zhytomyr, Lviv and Khmelnytsk provide for
further teacher training courses.
The Russian language
12 higher education establishments of the I-II levels of accreditation and 34
higher education establishments of the III-IV levels of accreditation in all the
administrative units of Ukraine train teachers of secondary schools with the Russian
language of teaching. These are classical universities and pedagogical universities.
Teacher training is carried out by the lecturers of the departments of the Russian
literature, Slavic languages, etc. Further teacher training is provided for in all regional
Institutes of Postgraduate Education.
In particular, the Donetsk Regional Institute of Postgraduate education carries out
systematic work to improve methodological culture and professional competence of
teachers of the Russian language and literature in the exam period. From 2008-2011 a
number of events were held: 15 masterclasses of teachers of the Russian language
and literature were held, a range of scientific methodical events were held: 15
seminars, 24 practical seminars, 11 practical conferences, 27 masterclasses, 39
thematic tutorials, 18 meetings of the regional creative group for developing an
electronic texbook in Russian for the pupils of the 8th grade, 8 meetings of the
laboratory, 8 meetings of methodical laboratory, 4 teaching seminars, 4 Internet
competitions, 3 round-table discussions, 5 presentations of postgraduate education, 6
festivals, 3 students' scientific practical seminars, 3 students' scientific and practical
conferences, student's practical readings. Pedagogical readings "Paths of Teachers ..."
by the creative legacy of V.A Sukhomlynsky were held in August within the teaching
studio.
In the Dnipropetrovsk region, the Regional Institute of Postgraduate Education offers
special courses and optional subjects in the process of training teachers of the Russian
language and literature; a number of regional workshops for teachers "Innovative
technologies in teaching Russian language and literature" were organized.

95

In the Lugansk region, a range of education plans for thematic courses of futher
training teachers of Russian language were elaborated according to length of teaching
experience. In addition to the basic plan, special courses "Innovative technologies in
museum pedagogy," "Modern technologies of teaching Russian language and
literature" were offered to the teachers of Russian language and literature. During the
courses, the Russian language teachers study a special course in information
technology. New courses, lectures, tutorials, case discussions. etc. were developed.
For the purpose of informational support for professional development of teachers of
the Russian language, in terms of further training courses, a special guide to
"Postgraduate education: the professional development of teachers of the Russian
language and literature is published each year.
The Poltava Regional Institute of Postgraduate Education named after M.V
Ostrogradskiy established special research group of Russian language teachers to
develop the concept of key models and professional competence of pupils. The Group
prepared and published methodical collections "Hohol and Poltava", "Russian
language, collection of texts for 6th-9th grades, socio-cultural aspect" and together
with the Poltava National Pedagogical University named after V.G Korolenko, the
group edited the manual "Hohol on the lessons of the Russian language: Ukrainian
subjects."
Scientific and methodological support of teaching Russian language and literature in
general education institutions of Sevastopol is carried out at the Institute of
Postgraduate Studies of the Sevastopol city Humanities University. Such activity
helps settling the following issues: development of teachers' professional
competence, developing pupils' multicultural competence, assisting gifted children,
impelemting new technologies into education process, organizing events, dedicated to
anniversaries of various writers and poets.
The Voronezh Regional Institute of Further teacher training and the St. Petersburg
Academy of Postgraduate Education (Russian Federation) offer advanced training
courses for teachers of the Russian language and literature.
The Romanian language
The National University of Uzhhorod and its affiliated colleges, the Y.
Fedkovych National University of Chernivtsi, the State Humanities University of
Izmail and the Regional Odessa and Chernivtsi Institutes for Advanced Teacher
Training train teachers of Romanian for general secondary education establishments
with the Romanian language of teaching.
The Slovak language
Further teacher training is provided for at the Zakarpatya and Uzhhorod National
Universities of Further Teacher Training.

96

Besides, teachers of the Slovak language and literature have a possibility to
participate in summer seminars organized in the Republic of Slovakia and in
language-professional courses at the Methodical Centre at the Banska Bystryzia
University named after Matej Bel.
The Hungarian language
Further teacher training is provided for at the Uzhhorod National University,
Zakarpatya Hungarian Institute named after F. Rakoczi II, the Mukachevo
Humanities and Pedagogical Institute of Further Teacher training and at the
Zakarpatya Institute of Postgraduate Teacher Training and its subsidiary in the city
of Berehovi, as well as during teaching refresher courses in education establishments
in Hungary.
Paragraph i)
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sport of Ukraine is an
oversight body, which controls minority languages studying and teaching in minority
languages.
The materials and conclusions concerning minority languages, studying and
teaching in minority languages are annually published in digests to final meetings of
the education Board and on the official website of the Ministry. During the meetings,
the education Board considers taking measures, drafting and adopting regulatory and
legal acts.
The Ministry of Education and Science, Youth and Sports of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea, regional education management boards and education
management boards of Kyiv and Sevastopol state administrations publish materials
concerning their territorial units and minority languages spoken on their territories.

Paragraph 2)
Education management boards provide parents, pupils and students with
information on law dispositions which regulate language usage in education as well
as information on the network of education establishments.
The Belarusian language
As stated above, education establishments and education authorities have not
received any applications from parents or pupils for providing education or its part in
the Belarusian language or studying this language. In case we receive a sufficient

97

number of applications from outside the traditional language areas, the issue will be
considered and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law
of Ukraine “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority
languages”.
The Bulgarian Language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils outside the traditional language areas, for
providing education or its part in the Bulgarian language or studying this language. In
case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and
resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On
Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
The Gagauzian language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils outside the traditional language areas, for
providing education or its part in the Gagauzian language or studying this language.
In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered
and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine
“On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils outside the traditional languages areas, for
providing education or its part in these languages or studying these languages. In case
we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and
resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On
Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
The Modern Greek was not used in Ukraine. The information hereof is given
in corresponding chapters.
Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils outside the traditional language areas, for
providing education or its part in the Hebrew language or studying this language. In
case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and
resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine
“Omn Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
Yiddish was traditionally used in all the territories. The information hereof is
given in corresponding chapters.
The Crimean Tatar language

98

Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils outside the traditional language areas, for
providing education or its part in the Crimean Tatar language or studying this
language. In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be
considered and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law
of Ukraine “On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority
languages”.
The information concerning the Crimean Tatar language of teaching and
studying this language in the Autonomous Republic of Crimea, the regions of
Zaporizhya, Kherson and the city of Sevastopol is given above.
The Moldovan language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils outside the traditional language areas, for
providing education or its part in the Moldovan language or studying this language.
In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered
and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine
“On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
The German language
German was traditionally used in all the territories. The information hereof is
given in corresponding chapters.
The Polish language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils outside the traditional language areas, for
providing education or its part in the Polish language or studying this language. In
case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and
resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On
Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
The Russian language
Russian was traditionally used in all the territories. The information hereof is
given in corresponding chapters.
The Romanian language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils outside the traditional language areas, for
providing education or its part in the Romanian language or studying this language.
In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered
and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine
“On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
The Slovak language

99

Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents outside the traditional language usage, for providing
education or its part in the Slovak language or studying this language. In case we
receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered and resolved
in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine “On
Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
The Hungarian language
Education establishments and education authorities have not received any
applications from parents or pupils outside the traditional language areas, for
providing education or its part in the Hungarian language or studying this language.
In case we receive a sufficient number of applications, the issue will be considered
and resolved in accordance with the Constitution of Ukraine and the Law of Ukraine
“On Ratification of European Charter for Regional or Minority languages”.
Article 14
Paragraph a)
The Belarusian language
The following agreements are in force in Ukraine: the Agreement between the
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and the Government of the Republic of Belarus on
mutual recognition and equivalence of documents on education and academic titles
and the Agreement between the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine and
the Ministry of Education of the Republic of Belarus on cooperation in education of
18.06.2001.
The Centre of the Belarusian language at the Institute of Philology of the Taras
Shevchenko National University of Kyiv coordinates international cooperation with
higher education establishments of the Republic of Belarus, gives informational
support for students and teachers on training courses in education establishments of
the country and on scientific conferences and seminars.
To deepen international cooperation in education, to share cultural traditions of
peoples of Ukraine, Belarussia and Russia, every year near the Friendship Monument
in the village of Senkivka of the Horodyanskyi municipal district in the Chernihiv
region, a festival " The Source of Slavic friendship" takes place. Secondary schools #
5, 21, 30 in Chernihiv, teachers and students in schools in the city of Gomel,
education establishments of the municipal district of Horodyany in the Chernihiv
region and Dobrusk in Belarusia, schools and education establishments of the
Chernihiv and Gomel regions continue sharing teaching and education experience.
In 2010, the authorities signed the protocol of intentions on the cooperation between
education establishments of the region of Rivne (Ukraine) and the region of Brest
(Belarusia), under which the parties agreed to develop international cooperation in

100

education, the exchange of experience, creative development of pupils and teachers,
to assist in making bilateral agreements on cooperation between secondary and
vocational education establishments, to promote exchange programs of students and
teachers in order to get a deeper knowledge of the culture of two nations, to hold
sporting competitions, etc.
In March 2011 the students of the National University "Ostroh Academy" presented
their university in the academic circles of Belarusia for the third time. This year nine
students took part in the V International Youth Scientific-practical conference
"Scientific potential of youth - the future of Belarusia" in Minsk.

The Bulgarian Language
The following agreements are in force in Ukraine: the Agreement between Ukraine
and the Government of the Republic of Bulgaria on cooperation in education, science
and culture, the Agreement between the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and the
Government of the Republic of Bulgaria on mutual recognition and equivalence of
documents on education and academic titles and the Agreement between the Ministry
of Education and Science of Ukraine and the Ministry of Education of the Republic
of Bulgarian and the Protocol on cooperation and exchange between the Ministry of
Education and Science of Ukraine and Ministry of Education of the Republic of
Bulgarian for 2008/2009, 2009/2010, 2010/2011 academic years of 09.07.2009 and
the Protocol between the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine and Ministry
of Education of the Republic of Bulgarian on the Bolhrad gymnasium named after
H.S. Rakovskyi of 29.07.2009.
This year, the Department of Higher Education of the Republic of Bulgaria
suggested that teachers of the Bulgarian philology at the department of the I.I.
Mechnikov Odessa National University should participate in European international
project "Bulgarian identity in multilingual European culture", which is coordinated
by the Shumen University. The department prepared and submitted respective
documentation for this project.

The Gagauzian language
The following agreements are in force in Ukraine: the Agreement between Ukraine
and the Government of the Republic of Moldova on cooperation in education, science
and culture, the Agreement between the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and the
Government of the Republic of Moldova on mutual recognition and equivalence of
documents on education and academic titles and the Agreement between the Ministry
of Education and Science of Ukraine and the Ministry of Education of the Republic
of Moldova and the Protocol on cooperation in education between the Ministry of

101

Education and Science of Ukraine and the Ministry of Education of the Republic of
Moldova for 2010/2011, 2011/2012, 2012/2013 academic years of 29.06.2010.

Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum
The program of cooperation in education, science and culture between the
Government of Ukraine and the Government of the Hellenic Republic for 2002-2005,
the of 16.04.2002 is in force in Ukraine.
The Mariupol State University signed a cooperation agreement with the Yannin
University (Greece).

Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
The Agreement on Cooperation in Education between the Government of Ukraine
and the Government of Israel of 09.04.2000 is in force in Ukraine.
In November 2010, Israeli President Shimon Peres visited Dnipropetrovsk, where he
learned about the work of the specialized school number 144 with advanced courses
on Hebrew, Jewish history, Jewish tradition, which maintains friendly contacts with
Israeli education institutions. Every year the school organizes international camps
"Havaya", where children interact with their peers from the U.S.A. and Israel.

The Crimean Tatar language
The following agreements are in force in Ukraine: the Agreement on cultural
cooperation between Ukraine and the Government of the Republic of Turkey and the
Agreement on Cooperation in Education between the Ministry of Education of
Ukraine and the Ministry of National Education and Higher Education Council of
Turkey.

The Moldovan language
The following agreements are in force in Ukraine: the Agreement between Ukraine
and the Government of the Republic of Moldova on cooperation in education, science
and culture, the Agreement between the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and the
Government of the Republic of Moldova on mutual recognition and equivalence of
documents on education and academic titles and the Agreement between the Ministry
of Education and Science of Ukraine and the Ministry of Education of the Republic
of Moldova and the Protocol on cooperation in education between the Ministry of

102

Education and Science of Ukraine and the Ministry of Education of the Republic of
Moldova for 2010/2011, 2011/2012, 2012/2013 academic years of 29.06.2010.
The German language
The following agreements are in force in Ukraine: the Agreement between Ukraine
and the Government of Germany on referral of German teachers to education
institutions of Ukraine of 10.06.1993 and the Agreement between Ukraine and the
Government of Germany on Cultural Cooperation of 15.02.1993.

The Polish language
The following agreements are in force in Ukraine: the Agreement between Ukraine
and the Government of the Republic of Poland on cooperation in culture, science and
education and the Agreement on Cooperation between the Ministry of Education and
Science of Ukraine and Minister of National Education of Poland of 02.07.2001.
The Ukrainian and Polish teachers exchange program is expanded. Thus in the
2010/2011 academic year, 22 teachers of the Polish language and literature from the
Republic of Poland worked in secondary schools of Ukraine.
The authorities signed agreements on cooperation between 12 secondary schools of
the Rivne region with Polish secondary schools to exchange pupils, to acquaint them
with the traditions and culture of Poland and Ukraine and to broaden their knowledge
of Polish and Ukrainian languages.
The department of Polonaise Studies at the Institute of Philology of the Taras
Shevchenko National University of Kyiv cooperated with a number of education
establishments of Poland: the Polish Academy of Science, the University of Warsaw,
the Jagiellonian University in Krakow, the John Paul II Catholic University in Lublin,
the Maria Curie-Skłodowska University in Lublin, The University in Wroclaw and
the Polish Institute in Kyiv. Students go to study in Warsaw and Wroclaw for a term,
and in summer schools to Krakow and Lublin. Lecturers from Poland often work at
the department.
The department of Polish philology at the Ivan Franko National University of Lviv
cooperates with Polish universities in the framework of international agreements. The
Department established cooperation, which provides scientific training of teachers,
exchange of lecturers, exchange of student groups, organization of joint conferences
with the University of Silesia, the Maria Curie-Skłodowska University in Lublin, the
Wroclaw University, the University of Poznan, the Jagiellonian University, the
Warsaw University, the Catholic University in Lublin. In addition, the scientists of
the department participate in international conferences that take place in other Polish
institutions - for example, in Łódź, Bialystok and the Rzeszów State University.

103

In the framework of international cooperation with the University of Wroclaw, there
is an annual two-week training for third-year students studying Polish at this
University.
Each year the best students of the Department of Polish Philology study in summer
schools of Polish language and culture (Tsyeshyn, Warsaw, Lublin, Krakow and
Wroclaw).
Since 2008 the best fourth-year students have had the opportunity to study at the
Warsaw University for the term.
Together with the School of Polish Language and Culture at the University of
Selassie and the Department of Applied Linguistics at the Ivan Franko National
University of Lviv, the department of Polish Philology organized and hosted the
International scientific conference "The foreign language: the problem of certification
according to European standards" (23-24 April 2009). The department of Polish
Philology, together with the School of Polish Language and Culture at the University
Selassie (Katowice, Poland) was the organizer of the cycle of postgraduate training in
"Polish as a foreign language and Polish culture," which took place from May 2008
to October 2009. The courses were conducted by experts from the School of Polish
Language and Culture at the University of Silesia. More than 50 students from
Ukraine obtained diplomas of second education at the University Selassie.
During 2006-2010 the Department of Polish Philology at the Ivan Franko National
University of Lviv hosted a lecturer Monica Rusin, MA of the University of Silesia in
Katowice, from the 2010-2011 academic year Jerzy Kovalevsky, doctor of
humanities, is an intern at the department.
In November 2010, under the action "Ukraine in the centre of Lublin" within four
days the inhabitants of the city of Lublin (Poland) had a chance to get acquainted
with Ukrainian culture. On the initiative of a group of students and graduate students
from the Lublin-Ukrainian universities, the event, aimed at spreading knowledge
about Ukraine in Poland, was conducted. The residents of the city became acquainted
with the works of Ukrainian toy artists, participated in competitions in Ukrainian,
listened to the Ukrainian music performed by groups from the city of Lviv and
became acquainted with photographs, Ukrainian cinema, etc. They also participated
in the debate on the topic: "How to promote Ukraine in Poland?" with the
participation of the Consuls of Ukraine in Lublin and Khelm and other dignitaries. In
the city centre the big screen was displaying films about Ukraine, which also
presented a film about the oldest institution of East land - Ostroh Academy. Lublin is
a typical student town, where about 600 Ukrainians obtain education.
In November 2010, the National University "Ostroh Academy" held an international
scientific conference "Cross-border cooperation in the context of European
integration of Ukraine”. The conference was held in the framework of the
International scientific and education project "From the local neighbourhood to

104

international partnership European Neighbourhood days in 2010 "and was intended to
attract researchers and practitioners, lecturers, researchers, graduate students,
government authorities and Public Organizations from Ukraine, Poland and Germany
to address the pressing problems of cross-border cooperation. In discussing the
various problems and challenges of cross-border cooperation between Ukraine and
Poland, the authorities had an idea to create a joint Ukrainian-Polish Centre for the
Study of Central and Eastern Europe.
In January 2011, the Rivne Institute of Slavic Studies of the Kyiv Slavic University
hosted an international scientific conference "Central and Eastern Europe: Twenty
years of systemic transformation and geopolitical change," whose participants were
scientists from Ukraine, Russia and Poland.
In April 2011, the National University "Ostroh Academy" held IV International
scientific conference "Problems of cultural identity: the relationship of traditional and
modern aspects of identification", organized by the Department of Culture and
philosophy, which was attended by scientists from Poland.
28 secondary schools in the Ternopil region concluded cooperation agreements with
education institutions of Bohnia, Krakow, Przemysl, Kudowa, Poznan, etc. 16
secondary schools in Vinnytsia region also support partnerships with Poland.
In the Volyn region the authorities established cooperation in the sphere of education
between students of secondary school of I-III degrees № 4 of Kivertsi and the
gymnasium of Hrubeshov, Vladimir-Volyn education complex # 3 and lyceum of
Hrabovets, the secondary school of Hyschansk in the municipal district of Lyboml'
and the schools of the city of Fayslavitse, vocational school № 22 of the village of
Lykov and the Union of schools № 2 (Schoo Rilnycha) of Lublin province.
The Drohobych Branch of the Institute of Innovative Technology and Content of
Education cooperates with the Provincial methodical centre for further teacher
training in the city of Hozhu Wielkopolska.
The History Faculty of the Honchar National University of Dnipropetrovsk is actively
cooperating with Polish universities (the Faculty of History and Pedagogy of the
University of Wroclaw, the Institute of Archaeology of the Maria Curie-Skłodowska
University in Lublin. Different presentations of monographs, devoted to the
Ukrainian-Polish historical and cultural ties, take place. A local historical tour of
"The Poles in pre-revolutionary Yekaterinoslav was developed. Polish scientists took
part in the international conference "East Ukraine in the context of the historical
development of Central and Eastern Europe" (October 2009).
Lecturers of the Faculty of History participate in international conferences in the
framework of Ukrainian-Polish project "Historiography and mentality" which are
organized by the Poznan, Zheshuvska, Lodz and Lviv Universities.

105

The Russian language
The following agreements are in force in Ukraine: the Agreement between the
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and the Government of the Russian Federation on
mutual recognition and equivalence of documents on education and academic titles
and the Agreement between the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine and
the Ministry of general and Vocational Education of the Russian Federation on
cooperation in education of 27.02.1998.
The quota established by the Russian Centre of International Scientific and Cultural
Cooperation under the Ministry of Foreign Affairs of the Russian Federation
stipulates, that teachers of Russian language and literature have the opportunity to
take teacher refresher training courses in Moscow, Voronezh, Rostov-on-Don and St.
Petersburg.
The authorities of the Donetsk region and regions of the Russian Federation signed an
agreement to promote cooperation in education and research through mutual
exchanges of students, pupils, teachers and researchers. Similar agreements were
signed by higher education establishments: the Donetsk State University of
Management with the Russian Academy of Management and Market (in Moscow),
the St. Petersburg State Technological University, The Volhohrad Insitite of
Economy, Sociology and Law, etc., the Donetsk Law Institute with the St.Petersburg
University of MIA of Russia, etc., the State Humanities University of Mariupol with
the Moscow State Humanities University; The Pedagogical University of Horlivka
with the South Federal University (Rostov-on-Don); the Donetsk Industrial
Engineering Academy with the Moscow State Technical University, the Moscow
State Institute of Steel and Alloy, etc., the Horkyi National Medical University of
Donetsk with the State Scientific Institution "Research Centre for the quality of
expert training of the Federal Agency of education of the Russian Federation".
For several years a group of students of the Russian Branch of the Institute of
Philology of the Carpathian National University named after Stefanik takes training
courses at the State Historical and Cultural and Natural Landscape Museum-Reserve
of O.S. Pushkin's "Mihailivske" (the Pskov region).
In the framework of the agreement on cooperation between the Ivano-Frankivsk
Regional State Administration and the mayor's office of Yaroslavl in 2010, the
delegation of students and teachers from the city of Yaroslavl visited the Carpathian
region, and the pupils of the region rested in the camp "Young Guard" (the Yaroslavl
region).
Under the cooperation agreement between the Department of Education and Science
of Ivano-Frankivsk Regional State Administration and the Committee on Education
and Administration of the Novgorod region and the rector of the Novgorod State
University named after Yaroslav the Wise, the school-leavers of the Ivano-Frankivsk

106

secondary school of the I-III degrees # 3shall enrol on preferential terms to the
abovementioned education establishment.
In 2010, the Department for Education and Science of the Sumy Regional State
Administration and the Committee of Education and Science of the Kursk region
signed an agreement on cooperation in education. With the assistance of the Kursk
regional public organization "Slavic cultural and historical centre" Holy Rus' the
authorities formed and relegated a library of classic literature to students of education
establishments of the Sumy region. In the summer of 2010, in the village of Ryasne
there was a place-tourist meeting with student delegations from the district of
Rokytne in the Belgorod region and Krasnopillia district of the Sumy region.
In the framework of the agreement of cooperation between "Roszarubizhtsentr"
(Russia) and Zaporizhya Gymnasium "Osnova", the NEC of Novavasylivka
"Harmony" of the Azov district of the Zaporizhya region exchanged methodical and
fiction literature and released collections of pupils' poetry. Zaporizhya gymnasium №
28 cooperates with the Moscow Academy of Training and Further Training of
Teachers and the Voronezh Regional Institute of Training and Further Training of
Teachers. School teachers took refresher training courses at these establishments.
The National University of Civil Defense of Ukraine and the Kharkiv National
Automobile and Highway University cooperate on education and science with the
Belgorod State Technological University named after Shukhov, the Kharkiv
University of Humanities "People's Ukrainian Academy" amd with the scientists of
the Belgorod State University.

The Romanian language
The following agreements are in force in Ukraine: the Agreement between
the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and the Government of Romania on mutual
recognition and equivalence of documents on education and academic titles and the
Protocol on cooperation between the Ministry of Education and Science of Ukraine
and the Ministry of Education, Research and Youth of Romania on cooperation in
education for 2008-2009, 2009-2010, 2010-2011 academic years.
On the basis of the Protocol the Joint Commission of Experts work to analyse the
correlation between textbooks, and make recommendations to developers of
textbooks on language, literature, history, geography, culture, ethnology in Romanian
in Ukraine and, accordingly, in the Ukrainian language in Romanian schools for
general secondary education.
Higher education establishments of Ukraine perform important and fruitful
cooperation with scientific and education institutions of Romania, which covers
various aspects of life. Cooperation is based on bilateral agreements between
universities of both countries. In particular, the Uzhhorod National University

107

maintains close ties with the Babes-Bolyai University of Cluj, the university Baia
Mare, the Academy of Trade of Satu Mare and the city museum of Satu Mare.
University scientists and Romanian experts work on the study of ethno-cultural,
political and general historical processes in the Carpathian region, conduct
archaeological, ethnographic, folklore and historical research in South-Western
Romania and Transcarpathia. Research findings are highlighted at international
scientific conferences and workshops.
The State Humanities University of Izmail, in the framework of the bilateral
agreement with the Jos Din Galati University of Dunarea, cooperates in such
directions: training courses and postgraduate studies at the Jos Din Galati University
of Dunarea, international conferences dedicated to memorable dates (Festival of
Poetry by P.Botsu, conference to the 155th anniversary of religious and cocial figure
N. Paku).
The Yuriy Fedkovych National University of Chernivtsi signed bilateral cooperation
agreements with the University of Suceava "Stefan cel Mars", the university "BabehBoyay" (Cluj-Napoca), the University of Bucharest, the Botoshansk Orthodox
Seminary "St. George ", the University" A.I. Cuza and the "National Institute of
Economic Research of the Romanian Academy of Sciences (Bucharest).
To implement the concluded agreements, the Faculty of Philology,
Geography, Physics, the Faculty of History and Political Science and International
Affairs and the Department of Computer Science were involved.
In cooperation with the University of Suceava and the Universities of Chernivtsi and
Suceava, there were held summer schools in Ukrainian and, accordingly, in
Romanian, which traditionally involve students of the philological and historical
faculties of both universities. In addition, each summer archaeological practice is
conducted.
Students of the Faculty of Computer Science take part in the international
competition "Hard & Soft", which is held at the Suceava University.
The Yuriy Fedkovych National University of Chernivtsi is a partner to higher
education establishments of Romania on implementation of international projects of
cooperation, which is financed by the foundations of the European Union: "RomaniaUkraine: joint management to protect the quality of air in international aspect of
Suceava - Chernvtsi".One of the results of the project was the publication of
Handbook of joint actions to protect air quality in the transboundary context "InfoBukovina - development of tourism industry in a Transboundary Context." The
project aimed to create tourist information centre in the Suceava county, publication
of information booklets Bukovina tourist, "Cultural roots, people, common traditions,
natural places of pilgrimage tourism in Bukovina". The album "Bukovina tourist",
"Integrated water quality monitoring of the cross-border river Siret was issued. The
result is further training of specialists on monitoring water quality, "Bukovina

108

Innovation Centre." Expected result is the creation of innovative laboratories, "Foster
the development of local socio-economic sphere" in cooperation with the North
University in Baya Mare, and the Chamber of Commerce in Baya Mare.
Pursuant to Article 5 of the Protocol on cooperation in education between
the Ministry of Education, Research and Innovations of Romania and the Ministry of
Education and science of Ukraine for 2008-2009, 2009-2010 and 2010-2011
academic years, 94 ethnic Romanian from Ukraine were admitted to education
establishments of Romania in 2008-2009 academic year, namely 39 to obtain a
qualification level of "bachelor" and 39 - "master and 7- to take doctoral courses and
9 as postgraduate students.

The Slovak language
The following agreements are in force in Ukraine: the Agreement between the
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and the Government of the Slovak Republic on
mutual recognition and equivalence of documents on education, issued in Ukraine
and the Slovak Republic and the Program of cooperation between the Ministry of
Education and Science of Ukraine and the Ministry of Education, of the Slovak
Republic on cooperation in education for 2005-2008 (extended).
Teaching staff of secondary schools participate in further training courses, teaching
days, language and professional courses and summer workshops on the Slovak
language, organized by the methodical centre at the University named after Matej Bel
in Banska Bystrica (Slovakia).
In 2011, the training of teachers of Slovak language and primary school teachers who
work in classes with the Slovak language of teaching, with the participation of
methodological and pedagogical centre of Bratislava and the University of Cyril and
Methodius in Trnava, took place.
The Oles Honchar National University of Dnipropetrovsk supports partnerships with
methodological centre SAS (Studia Academica Slovaca) of the Philosophy Faculty of
Comenius University, Bratislava.

The Hungarian language
The following agreements are in force in Ukraine: the Agreement between
the Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and the Government of the Republic of Hungary
on cooperation in education, culture and science, and the Agreement between the
Cabinet of Ministers of Ukraine and the Government of the Republic of Hungary on

109

mutual recognition and equivalence of documents on education, issued in Ukraine
and the Republic of Hungary.
The Humanities and Natural Sciences Faculty with the Hungarian language of
teaching of the Uzhgorod National University closely cooperates with universities in
Hungary. During an academic year, third-year students take training courses at the
Debrecen University. During the previous academic year, students of historical
faculty undertook their archaeological practice in Hungary, and this academic year,
the best students have won scholarships for undergraduate practices that take place in
Germany and Hungary. Fifth-year students of the department of Hungarian philology
annually undertake undergraduate training in Budapest, in the central library named
after Syycheni.
Secondary schools with the Hungarian language of teaching of the region of
Zakarpatya established fruitful cooperation with education institutions of the
Republic of Hungary.

3.2. Judicial authorities (Article 9 of the Charter)
Pursuant to the Judgment of the Constitutional Court of Ukraine #10- /99 of 14
December 1999, "the provisions of part one of article 10 of the Constitution of
Ukraine, which establishes that —Ukrainian is the official language in Ukraine“ shall
be understood as follows: Ukrainian as the official language is a mandatory means of
communication in the entire territory of Ukraine during exercise of powers by public
authorities and local governments, (i.e. the language of acts, work, office and
paperwork etc.) and in other public areas of social life as determined by the law.
The Judgment of the Constitutional Court is binding, final and cannot be appealed in
the territory of Ukraine, the use of languages other than the official one in courts of
justice is virtually ruled out.
Information on the Application of Article 9 of Part III of the Charter is not registered
in primary accounting documents and materials in courts and is not displayed in the
statistical reports of the courts.

Paragraph 1
subparagraph a (iii)
In criminal proceedings the petition and evidence, whether written or oral, shall not
be regarded as inadmissible solely because they are formulated in the Belarusian,
Bulgarian, Gagauzian, Greek and Jewish minorities languages, Crimean Tatar,
Moldovan, German, Polish, Romanian, Slovak or Hungarian languages.

110

Persons, involved in the case, who do not speak the language in which proceedings
are held, shall enjoy the right to make statements, testify, submit petitions, familiarize
with all the case materials, appear in court in their native language and use services of
an interpreter in accordance with the laws of Ukraine. A defendant shall be provided
with investigative and judicial documents translated into his/her native language or
any other language he/she might speak.
The accused person is guaranteed the right to use his/her regional or minority
language.
Administrative-territorial
Unit

The amount of money allocated for services
of translators during proceedings in local
courts
(2008-2011)

The Autonomous Republic 0
of Crimea
The Vinnytsia region

0

The Volyn region

306.00

The Dnipropetrovsk region

3,540.20

The Donetsk region

15,248.00

The Zhytomyr region

0

The Zakarpatya region

15,007.20

The Zaporizhzhia region

10,100.00

The Ivano-Frankivsk region

950.00

The Kyiv region

0

The Kirovohrad region

0

The Luhansk region

644.21

The Lviv region

6,137.00

The Mykolaiv region

0

The Odessa region

346,704.68

The Poltava region

0

The Rivne region

16,160

111

The Sumy region

0

The Ternopil region

0

The Kharkiv region

10,345.44

The Kherson region

16,200.00

The Khemlytsk region

22,601.50

The Cherkasy region

0

The Chernivtsi region

13,727.50

The Chernihiv region

3,418.00

The city of Kyiv

7,187.08

The city of Sevatopol

6,406.71

Total:

159,74

subparagraph b (iii):
During civil proceedings, it is allowed to submit documents and evidence in the
regional or minority languages by the use of interpreters and translators.
Pursuant to the applicable law, any persons, who participate in the proceedings but do
not speak or have insufficient command of the State language, shall have the right to
make applications, provide clarifications, appear in court and file motions in their
native language or in a language they can speak, using services of a
translator/interpreter in accordance with the procedure established by the applicable
law of Ukraine. Pursuant to Article 55 of the Code of civil procedure of Ukraine, an
interpreter/translator shall be approved by court's decision based on the application of
a person participating in the proceedings. Courts shall carry out legal proceedings on
claims laid by a party to the proceeding in national minority languages. If a party
must appear before court personally, it may be allowed to speak its regional language
or a language spoken by the minorities without any additional expenses. Should there
be a necessity to engage interpreters or translators it is allowed to submit documents
and evidences in national minority languages.
Administrative-territorial
Unit

The amount of money allocated for services of
translators during proceedings in courts of appeal
(2008-2011)

The Autonomous Republic of

571.04

112

Crimea
The Vinnytsia region

0

The Volyn region

0

The Dnipropetrovsk region

0

The Donetsk region

0

The Zhytomyr region

0

The Zakarpatya region

528

The Zaporizhzhia region

0

The Ivano-Frankivsk region

0

The Kyiv region

0

The Kirovohrad region

0

The Luhansk region

0

The Lviv region

0

The Mykolaiv region

235

The Odessa region

2,308.66

The Poltava region

0

The Rivne region
The Sumy region

0

The Ternopil region

2,066.15

The Kharkiv region

0

The Kherson region

0

The Khemlytsk region

2,490.00

The Cherkasy region

0

The Chernivtsi region

1,095.00

The Chernihiv region

0

The city of Kyiv

0

The city of Sevatopol

0

Total:

9,293.85

113

subparagraph c (iii):
During administrative proceedings, it is allowed to submit documents and evidence
complied in the Greek language engaging interpreters and translators.
Courts shall carry out legal proceedings on claims laid by a party to the proceeding in
any national minority language. If a party must appear before court personally, it may
be allowed to speak his/her national minority language. The total amount of money
allocated for services of translators/interpreters in local administrative courts,
accounts for 37,050.00 UAH and includes the costs of only one region - the Odessa
region.

Paragraph 2
According to the applicable law, the validity, as between the parties, of legal
documents drawn up within the country solely because they are drafted in a regional
or minority language is not denied.

Paragraph 3
The provisions of the Paragraph shall be applied to the Russian language. Any laws
signed by the President of Ukraine, as well as the laws that have been officially made
public by the Chairman of Verkhovna Rada, shall be published in "Bulletins of the
Verkhovna Rada of Ukraine" in Ukrainian and in Russian.
Pursuant to the Decree of the President dated December 1996 No.1207/96 "On
publishing legislative acts of Ukraine in the news-bulletin "Official Bulletin of the
Verkhovna Rada ", the Ministry of Justice of Ukraine was instructed to ensure
publishing of laws and other regulatory legal acts of Ukraine translated into the
Russian language.
Pursuant to part 1 Article 2 of the Regulations of the Verkhovna Rada of the
Autonomous Republic of the Crimea, regulatory legal documents of the Verkhovna
Rada of the Autonomous Republic of the Crimea shall be published and made public
in the State language as well as in the Russian language and in the Crimean Tatar
language.

3.3. Administrative authorities and public services
Article 10 of the Charter

114

Article 26 of the law of Ukraine "On Local Self-Government in Ukraine" stipulates
that any solution related to the issue of Language(s) used by Rada and its executive
body in their activity and in official announcements shall fall under the exclusive
competence of village, locality and city councils in accordance with the Law.
Ukraine ensures compliance of the effective Law of Ukraine "On Languages in
Ukrainian SSR" and realization of the Judgment of the Constitutional Court of
Ukraine #10-NO/99 of 14 December 1999, which stipulates that, together with the
Ukrainian language, local executive bodies, executive bodies of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea and bodies of local self-government have the right to use the
Russian language and other minority languages when fulfilling their duties, as
determined by laws.
Pursuant to Article 6 of the Law of Ukraine "On Languages in the Ukrainian SSR" all
officials of state, party, public agencies, institutions and organizations shall have
command of the Ukrainian language and the Russian language, and, if required, other
national language to the extent needed for fulfilling their official duties.
Lack of command of the Ukrainian language or the Russian language by a citizen
shall give no grounds for accepting him/her for employment. After having been
employed an official shall master the language used in the authority or organization
to the extent required for fulfilling his/her official duties.
Article 8 of the law of Ukraine «On ethnic minorities in Ukraine» determines that if
the majority of population consists of a certain national minority, the language of
such minority along with the state Ukrainian language may used in the course of
work of any state or public agencies, institutions or organizations situated in the
locality.
Article 8 of the law of Ukraine «On ethnic minorities in Ukraine» determines that if
the majority of population consists of a certain national minority, the language of
such minority along with the state Ukrainian language may used in the course of
work of any state or public agencies, institutions or organizations situated in the
locality. .
Pursuant to Article 38 of the Law of Ukraine "On Languages in the Ukrainian SSR",
in Ukraine, the toponyms (names of inhabited localities, administrative-territorial
entities, streets, squares, rivers, etc.) shall be formed and presented in the Ukrainian
language. The toponyms may also be presented in the national language of the
majority of the population of a certain area.
Toponyms from outside the boundaries of Ukraine shall be presented in the
Ukrainian language by means of transcription from the source language.
The maps designated for the use in Ukraine shall be prepared in published in the
Ukrainian language.

115

3.4. Media (Article 11 of the Charter)

Ratio of quantity of printed media (newspapers) in Ukrainian to those in Russian and
other languages as well as the ratio of average single and annual runs of printed
media are presented in tables and displayed in charts.
year

1995

Quantity of
publications

2000

2005

2008

2009

2010

1877

2667

2974

2647

2499

2347

Ukr.

1078

1290

1509

1316

1264

1171

Rus.

698

1170

1199

1066

975

901

other.

101

207

266

265

260

275

Ukr..

57%

48%

51%

50%

51%

50%

Rus.

37%

44%

40%

40%

39%

38%

other

5%

8%

9%

10%

10%

12%

20570

47668

79509

59332

55368

54508

Ukr..

9537

13104

24822

18796

18506

18084

Rus.

9671

33116

51036

36648

32929

32376

Other.

1362

1448

3651

3888

3933

4048

Ukr..

46%

27%

31%

32%

33%

33%

Rus..

47%

69%

64%

62%

59%

59%

Other.

7%

3%

5%

7%

7%

7%

1629928.0

3458766

4959791.1

3966113.5

3444551.7

3168879.8

Ukr..

808901

876845

1668318

1141877

935746

1014915

Rus..

738597

2487092

3146551

2647385

2260890

2004117

Other.

82430

94829

144922.1

176851.5

247915.7

149847.8

Rus..

50%

25%

34%

29%

27%

32%

Rus..

45%

72%

63%

67%

66%

63%

Average
quantity of
single
publications

Annual
quantity of
publications

116

other.

5%

3%

3%

4%

7%

5%

117

3

multilingual

4

bilingual

Polish
5

German

244

Armenian

901

English

1171

Romanian

Ukrainian and Russian

2347

Hungarian

Russian

Quantity of
publication of
printed media

Total

Ukrainian

Including languages:

3

1

1

9

5

including
nationwide

298

141

130

21

-

-

-

1

-

1

2

2

regional

430

237

132

55

-

1

2

1

-

-

2

-

municipal

409

171

192

40

1

1

-

1

-

-

1

2

District

415

334

38

41

1

-

1

-

-

-

-

-

Local

185

90

67

27

-

-

-

-

-

-

1

-

Private

242

69

156

14

2

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

commercial.

249

91

126

32

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

other

119

38

60

14

1

1

-

-

1

-

3

1

Average
quantity of
single
publications .

54508

18084

32376

3864

38

7

58

34

1

1

23

22

includingі
Nationwide

13585

4006

9044

511

-

-

-

2

-

1

1

20

regional

10308

4653

4455

1121

-

1

56

7

-

-

15

-

municipal

9252

2809

5610

802

3

1

-

25

-

-

1

2

Regional

1580

1187

220

170

1

-

2

-

-

-

-

-

615

184

360

69

-

-

-

-

-

-

3

-

Private

9640

1218

8274

122

25

1

-

-

-

-

-

-

commercial

8043

3661

3477

904

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

other

1487

367

938

165

9

4

-

-

1

-

3

1

3168880

1014915

2004117

143180

Local

Quantity of
annual
publications.

2586

93

1043

1851

12

29

39
7

658

118

Including
Nationwide

1372939

341721

1014392

16071

-

-

-

60

-

29

35

632

Regional

536653

311577

191052

32196

-

8

964

541

-

-

31
7

-

Municipal

521933

101012

372792

46854

5

6

-

1250

-

-

1

14

District

90655

71711

11244

7609

12

-

79

-

-

-

-

-

Local

26397

4302

19719

2368

-

-

-

-

-

-

9

-

Private

255978

32699

216979

4937

1340

23

-

-

-

-

-

-

Commercial

325744

144560

151203

29981

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

38581

7333

26737

3165

1229

56

-

-

12

-

37

12

other

119

Distribution of newspapers according to types and languages

120

121

Publication of Books and Booklets in Ukraine

1995

The Quantity of printed
issues

2000

2005

2008

2009

2010

6109

7749

15720

24040

22491

22557

2855

4760

10258

16417

14797

14852

47

61

65

68

66

66

2393

2142

3982

5748

5732

5554

39

28

25

24

25

25

11.9

15.8

33.3

52.0

48.8

49.2

includingі
In Ukrainian
% out of total number
In Russian
% out of total number
Issues published
For 100 thousand people

122

Quantity of publications

68156

43563

54060

58158

48514

45058

32054

29225

33212

32606

27527

24704

47

67

61

56

57

55

30688

11730

16612

22535

18623

17973

45

27

31

39

38

40

132

89

115

126

105

98

including
In Ukrainian
% out of total number
In Russian
% out of total number
Annual run for 100 people

123

Periodicals in Ukraine

124

Quantity of periodicals

1995

2000

2005

2008

2009

2010

604

1245

2182

2422

2515

2822

309

527

883

954

918

1062

51

42

40

39

37

38

187

299

470

528

473

509

31

24

22

22

19

18

1,2

2,5

4,6

5,2

5,5

6,2

3192

3988

11271

22823

21985

24470

1947

1337

3505

3819

2861

3533

65

34

31

17

13

14

990

2111

6425

17151

17677

19203

31

53

57

75

80

78

including
In Ukrainian
% out of total number
In Russian
% out of total number
Issues published
For 100 thousand people

Average quantity of single
publication
including
In Ukrainian
% out of total number
In Russian
% out of total number

Annual quantity of publications.

23885 52492 132457 270356 256327 338034

including
In Ukrainian
% out of total number
In Russian
% out of total number

16642 12187
70

23

4309 37399
18

71

24923

36510

30484

66269

19

14

12

20

92932 223994 214257 256887
70

83

84

76

125

Annual circulation for 1 person

0,5

1,1

2,8

5,8

5,6

7,4

Distribution of periodicals in Ukraine according to languages

including

Total

Ukrai-

Russian

nian

Ukrai--

English

Kazakh-

nian and

Ger

Po--

Hun-

Bilin-

Multi--

-man

lish

garian

gual

lingual

-Russian

Quantity of issues

2822

1062

509

879

22

1

1

1

1

67

279

1810

680

315

562

20

-

1

1

1

38

192

652

251

28

269

2

-

-

-

-

21

81

including
magazines
journals

126

bulletins

317

107

163

36

-

1

-

-

-

8

2

43

24

3

12

-

-

-

-

-

-

4

24470,4

3532,6

19202,7

1182,9

41,7

3,0

0,5

1,0

2,4

379,9

123,7

12725,1

1880,8

9685,0

800,5

41,1

-

0,5

1,0

2,4

217,1

96,7

journals

596,1

482,6

8,6

75,6

0,6

-

-

-

-

4,6

24,1

bulletins

11140,3

1163,1

9508,3

305,2

-

3,0

-

-

-

158,2

2,5

8,9

6,1

0,8

1,6

-

-

-

-

-

-

0,4

338033,9

66268,6

256887,3

9168,8

104,2

57,0

0,5

1,0

9,4

5133,4

403,7

217886,4

47041,7

160917,6

4693,4

103,6

-

0,5

1,0

9,4

4790,5

328,7

journals

791,5

527,7

14,0

171,1

0,6

-

-

-

-

8,4

69,7

Bulletins

119320,5

18672,9

95954,0

4298,1

-

57,0

-

-

-

334,5

4,0

35,5

26,3

1,7

6,2

-

-

-

-

-

-

1,3

bibliographies

Average single publication
including
magazines

bibliographies

Annual circulation
Including
Magazines

bibliographies

Distribution of local TV broadcasting according to regions and
languages in 2008-2010.

Hungarian, %

German, %

Armenian, %

57,6

37,8

-

-

0,4

-

3,3

-

0,3

0,3

0

2009

14,40

59,7

34,1

-

-

0,5

-

4,2

-

0,5

0,5

0

2010

15,20

47,4

34,8

-

-

3,3

-

4,6

-

3,3

3,3

3

2008

19,00

99,8

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2009

16,84

100,0

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2010

14,43

100,0

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2008

20,50

95,1

-

-

2,4

-

-

-

1,5

0,5

-

2009

14,40

92,4

-

-

3,4

-

-

-

2,1

0,7

-

2010

15,70

93,6

-

-

2,6

-

-

-

2,0

0,6

-

2008

20,00

100,0

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2009

14,40

69,5

13,9

6,9

-

6,9

2,8

-

-

-

-

2010

13,20

75,8

7,5

6,1

-

6,1

4,5

-

-

-

-

2008

17,00

94,1

5,9

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2009

14,40

95,1

4,9

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2010

13,20

94,7

5,3

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2008

12,27

100,0

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2009

12,30

100,0

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2010

12,30

91,9

8,1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2008

20,10

92,5

7,5

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2009

14,40

99,3

0,7

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2010

13,20

99,2

0,8

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2008

12,66

97,6

2,4

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2009

12,40

96,8

3,2

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2010

13,20

93,9

6,1

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2008

22,00

86,4

13,6

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2009

14,40

96,5

3,5

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

Romanian, %

Moldovan, %

Crimean Tatar, %

Russian %

18,00

Середньодобовий
обсяг мовлення, год

Bulgarian, %

Ukrainian %

ARC

2008

year

Administrativeunit

Gagauzian, %

127

The Zhytomyr
region

The Zakarpatya
region

The Odessa
region

The Poltava
region

The Kharkiv
region

The Kherson
region

The Khmelnytsk
region

The Cherkasy
region

128

2010

13,20

100,0

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2008

8,73

85,1

-

-

-

-

-

-

14,9

-

-

2009

14,40

95,1

-

-

-

-

-

-

4,9

-

-

2010

15,70

94,9

-

-

-

-

-

-

5,1

-

-

2008

107,64

98,0

2,0

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2009

111,95

97,5

2,2

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2010

96,24

97,0

2,5

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

-

2008

11,97

30,7

66,8

-

-

-

-

2,5

-

-

-

2009

12,00

30,8

66,7

-

-

-

-

2,5

-

-

-

2010

12,00

75,0

21,9

-

-

-

-

3,1

-

-

-

The Chernivtsi
region

The city
Of Kyiv

The city of
Sevatopol

3.5. Cultural activities and facilities (Article 12 of the Charter)
(Question 577 of the Committee of Experts)
According to Article 3 of the Basic Laws of Ukraine on culture, as a priority
the state creates conditions for development of Ukrainian culture and minority
cultures. Budget programs "Activities on revival of culture of ethnic minorities" and
"Activities on implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority
languages" are being implemented. Each year, the State Budget allocates funds for
facilitating development of culture of ethnic minorities of Ukraine that are used for
arranging cultural and artistic events aimed at development of culture of ethnic
minorities of Ukraine. The Ministry for Culture and Tourism of Ukraine has
established cooperation with national- cultural associations whereby a number of allUkrainian and regional events are arranged annually. Local executive bodies have
created Councils for Ethnic Policy.
(Question 578 of the Committee of Experts)
The State makes conditions for the development of minority cultures a primary
priority. Public associations of national minorities are provided with premises in
long-term use for the implementation of their activities.
(Question 578 of the Committee of Experts)
Requirements for dubbing and subtitling films in minority languages in the
Ukrainian language are defined by laws of Ukraine. The authorities have not received
any complaints about problems with distribution of such films.
subparagraph a) of paragraph 1 of Article 12 of the Charter

129

The Belarusian language
In the Dnipropetrovsk region there is a regional public association "Belarusians
of Prydniprovia" which has a vocal ensemble "Zdravushka”.
In the Rivne region, Rivne branch of All-Ukrainian association "Belarus" holds
cultural and art events. There is an ensemble of Belarusian folk song "Rechanka".
(The questions 585, 586 of the Committee of Experts)
In order to promote the works, translated from Belorussian, libraries of the
region organize permanent information stands and showcases: "People. Facts.
Events”.
The Bulgarian Language
With the participation of members of the Donetsk Cultural Society of
Bulgarians "Renaissance" there was established a library of Bulgarian authors of
scientific and literary works, audio - and video collection about Bulgaria.
The library stock of the Ternopil Scientific Library contains 193 copies of the
documents in the Bulgarian language. In Ternopil there is a Bulgarian Association.
In the Kherson region there is a centre of the Bulgarian culture, Kherson
municipal public organization "Bulgarians of Kherson," which launched a month of
Bulgarian culture and Bulgarian Culture and opened a centre of the Bulgarian culture.
The Gagauzian language
Book fund of the Odessa region contains 1,303 copies in Gagauzian. Rural
libraries, which are located in places of compact settlement of national minorities,
undertake considerable activities on promoting Gagauzian literature and hold
presentations of book exhibitions "We are proud of our native word".
Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
In the Donetsk region, thanks to the Federation of Greek Societies of Ukraine
and its centres, inhabitants of the region are involved in the activities to revive
culture, literature and art of Azov Greeks - their historical homeland. The Donetsk
region has two theatres, House of Culture and 17 vocal, 3 folk groups, 4 groups of
song and dance and 9 dance music groups. There are two rural centres of Greek
culture, Greek Cultural Centre of Federation of Greek Societies of Ukraine. Different
cultural and art events take place.
The Greek cultural Fund of the Odessa region held a number of different
events for the Greek community of the Odessa region. They established the museum
"Filiki Eteri", courses of the Greek language and a library.
Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish

130

The Library of Jewish literature in the city of Kyiv contains 40 different names
of Jewish periodicals. There are Hebrew language courses and the club of
intellectuals at the library. The library stock of Jewish literature contains 5,000 copies
of publications.
The Library of Jewish literature in the city of Lutsk has 6 creative companies.
There are 13 public associations of Jews in the Donetsk region. The
associations set up a number of creative teams and 4 Jewish museums.
Libraries of the region of Kherson contain 100 copies of books in the
languages of Jewish minority. Museums set up display windows of Jewish cultural
life.
In the city of Kherson there is the Jewish centre "Shmoel."
The Crimean Tatar language
In the secondary school № 57 in the city of Sevastopol, there is a TV studio,
museums and a club "Heritage", which promote the development of the Crimean
Tatar national cultural traditions and customs.
In the Crimea there are 41 amateur teams, "The Crimean Tatar Academic
Music and Drama Theatre," and "The Crimean Tatar Library named after I.
Hasprynsky.
There are 120 works available in the Crimean Tatar language in the libraries of
the Chernihiv region.
The Moldovan language
In the Kirivohrad region there are 2 Moldovan ensembles.
In the Mykolaiv region there are 4 Moldovan amateur groups which actively
participate in international, national, regional, city concerts, competitions and
festivals of national cultures.
In the towns of the Odessa region, there are 366 libraries, which contain 61,144
copies of books in the Moldovan language.
The German language
The Library stock of the Vinnytsia regional Universal Scientific Library named
after Timiryazev K.A. was supplemented with 10 copies of documents in German,
and now it accounts for 32,860 copies.
In the Regional Universal Scientific Library named after. Ivan Franko ( IvanoFrankivsk,) the library stock in German accounts for 11.5 thousand copies. In 2010,
the library stock was supplemented with new valuable publications of German
authors in Ukrainian and German.

131

Library Stock of German literature in the Kherson region accounts for 0.21
thousand copies. In the Kherson region there are two centres of German culture,
which holds the Festival "Little Bavaria in big Kherson." In the regional museum
there is an exhibition "Roads of Destiny" (the history of German colonists).

The Polish language
In the library of A. Mickiewicz in the city of Kyiv there is a department of
Polish books. The Embassy of Poland in Ukraine transferred books to the library.
Today there are 5.5 thousand copies of publications in the library.
In the library collections of Lviv there are 5000 copies of books in Polish.
Chernihiv Regional Children (puppet) theatre staged a performance in Polish "Jumping Princess by" L. Dvorsky. The libraries of the region contain a significant
number of Polish literature (books and periodicals). The Priluky City Library has a
department of Polish literature.
The Russian language
In the city of Kyiv there is a library named after O.S. Pushkin, the partners of
which are the Ukrainian Society "Pushkinist", Kyiv city national cultural and
educational society "Russian Assembly".
In the city of Sevastopol there are two theatres, which stage performances in
Russian: the Sevastopol Academic Russian Drama Theatre named after A.V.
Lunacharsky and the Theatre for children and youth.
Library Stock of the Kherson region contains 3839.53 thousand copies in
Russian
Libraries in the Chernihiv region contain 5563.24 thousand copies in Russian 3
theatres stage performances in Russian. Annual festivals "Slavonic Theatrical
Meetings" take place.
The Romanian language
In areas densely populated by Romanians, in Transcarpathia, there are 5
cultural clubs, eight libraries (book stock in Romanian has over 14 thousand copies.
(46%), 2 children's art schools, 29 teams of amateur art, three of which are "national".
In the Chernivtsi region, library stock in Romanian has 52.2 thousand copies
(18%). Different cultural and art events take place, a library of the new Romanian
literature and Romanian publishers of the Chernivtsi region was established. At the
club facilities, there are 3,159 clubs (39,522 participants), of which 2,790 are amateur

132

teams (31,791 participants), 319 amateur associations and clubs (6,994 participants).
10 amateur Romanian amateur teams were granted with titles "national" and "model".
The Slovak language
In the Transcarpathian region, in the areas densely populated by Slovaks, there
are 11 club establishments, 5 libraries (total book stock of Slovak literature is more
than 6,500 copies), 22 amateur teams (280 participants).
The Hungarian language
In areas densely populated by Hungarians, in the Transcarpathian region, there
are 94 public libraries (in which there are 408.3 thousand copies of books in
Hungarian) 76 club establishments (336 groups of amateur art).
Subparagraph b), Paragraph 1, Article 12 of the Charter
(Questions 610-623 of the Committee of Experts)
The Belarusian language

Libraries keep and popularize literary works translated from the Belarusian
language into the Ukrainian language.
The Bulgarian Language
Libraries of the Odessa region keep and popularize literary works translated
from the Bulgarian language into the Ukrainian language.
The Gagauzian language
Libraries of the Odessa and Mykolaiv regions keep and popularize literary
works translated from the Gagauzian language into the Ukrainian language.
Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
Certain literary works of Greek minority are published both in Russian and in
languages of Greek minority. Greek societies are not directly involved in translation
of literary works.
Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
Libraries of the Rivne region keep 0.03 thousand copies of books in Jewish
minority languages and several Jewish works translated into Russian and Ukrainian.
The Crimean Tatar language
Libraries of the Odessa and Kherson regions keep and popularize literary
works translated from the Crimean Tatar language into the Ukrainian language.

133

The Moldovan language
Libraries keep and popularize literary works translated from the Moldovan
language into the Ukrainian language.
The German language
The head of the Donetsk regional centre of German culture wrote a play “With
hope in my heart” in Russian and German.
The Polish language
The representatives of Polish Diaspora in cooperation with the Society of
Polish culture of Donbas take part in nationwide and international competitions for
reciters in Polish.
The Russian language
Russian literary works translated into Ukrainian are freely available. 5 plays
were translated from Russian into Ukrainian in the Sumy regional children’s and
youth theatre.
The Romanian language
Libraries keep and popularize literary works translated from the Romanian
language into the Ukrainian language.
The Slovak language
Libraries keep and popularize literary works translated from the Slovak
language into the Ukrainian language.
The Hungarian language
Libraries keep and popularize literary works translated from the Romanian
language into the Ukrainian language.
Subparagraph c), Paragraph 1, Article 12 of the Charter
(Question 624- 632 of the Committee of Experts).
The German language
Editorial staff in the Transcarpathian regional state TV and Radio Company
does translations of the programs into German from other languages.
The Polish language
Ternopil Regional Drama Theatre translated the play "Gosling" into the Polish
language.
The Russian language

134

The Transcarpathian regional state TV and Radio Company employs editorial
staffs, which broadcast in Russian and Romani languages.

The Romanian language
The Transcarpathian regional state TV and Radio Company employs editorial
staffs, which broadcast in the Romanian language. Publishing houses of the
Transcarpathian region print literary works in Romanian.
The Slovak language
Editorial staff in the Transcarpathian regional state TV and Radio Company
does translations of the programs into Slovak from other languages.
The Hungarian language
Editorial staff in the Transcarpathian regional state TV and Radio Company
does translations of the programs into Hungarian from other languages.
There are no data concerning other languages.

Subparagraph d), Paragraph 1, Article 7 of the Charter
The Belarusian language
In the Chernihiv region, the authorities provide support for Belarusian national
and cultural societies and vocal duet "Syabrovyky" performing works in the
Belarusian language in a variety of cultural events.
The Rivne regional branch of All-Ukrainian association "Belarus" is an active
member of diverse national, regional and local cultural events, during which
participants speak Belarusian.
The Bulgarian Language
In the city of Zaporizhya, there were celebrations dedicated to the Day of
Slavic writing and Bulgarian culture, with the active participation of Zaporizhya
regional association of Bulgarian culture.
The Gagauzian language
In the Odessa region, there was a roundtable discussion on " the Gagauzian
language in Ukraine: state, problems and prospects."
Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.

135

In the Kherson region, there was a regional seminar on "Promoting cultural
ethnic relations", where members of Greek society were the participants and
speakers.
Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
Chernihiv City Jewish community, together with the Department of Culture of
Chernihiv City Council holds the annual Festival of Jewish Culture named after
Sholom Aleichem and Ukrainian festival of Jewish songs.
The Crimean Tatar language
(Question 636 of the Committee of Experts)
National teams in the Genichesk district (the Kherson region) and the Crimea
are actively involved in conducting celebrations, various holidays.
(Question 636 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ministry of Culture of the Autonomous Republic of Crimea holds events
aimed to popularize the Crimean Tatar language and literature, notably" All-Crimean
festival "Khydyrlez", International Crimean Tatar festival "Bakhchisarai",
International festival of Crimean Tatar culture and instrumental pop music "TeprechKefe" , International festival of Crimean Tatar and Turkic cultures "Derviza - Hezlev
kapusy", etc.
The Moldovan language
In cooperation with the national-cultural societies, there was the MoldovanUkrainian Festival of culture "Dniester wave", the first Moldovan Youth Festival
"Mertsishor, the VI Festival of Moldovan Culture in Reni, International Festival of
Moldovan Culture "Struhushor".
The German language
In the Donetsk region, there were 3 regional festivals of German culture and 3
German film festivals.
The Polish language
In the Donetsk region, there were two interregional festivals of Polish culture,
Polish festival of dance performances in Ukraine, exhibitions and expositions in the
regional art museum.
Sumy City Public Association of Polish culture, with the assistance of the
authorities held a seminar "Poland and Ukraine”.
The Russian language

136

State and local authorities of Rivne offer adequate support for the annual
celebrations of Russian folk art, traditional Pushkin days. They are making efforts to
disseminate information about the cultural values of the Russian people, organize
exhibitions of works of amateur artists and painters. In the Rivne region, the
authorities registered 5 Russian national-cultural societies.
State and local authorities of the Sumy region support the annual celebrations
of the artistic activities of the figures of Russian culture.
Kharkiv Regional Council secured funding from the regional budget of the
Russian edition Calendar of memorable dates.
The Romanian language
Local authorities of Transcarpathia give adequate support for the annual
celebrations of Romanian culture, in particular the regional festival of Romanian folk
art, regional festival "Mertsyshor."
The Slovak language
Local authorities of Transcarpathia give adequate support for the annual
regional festivals of Slovak folk culture.
The Hungarian language
State authorities and local authorities of Transcarpathia offer adequate support
of the annual celebrations of the Hungarian folk art, making efforts to disseminate
information about the cultural values of the Hungarian people.
Subparagraph f) of paragraph 1 of Article 12 of the Charter
The Belarusian language
In the Lviv region there is a public organization "Belarusian Community of
Lviv Region". The building was transferred to the community free of charge.
The Head of Rivne Regional Branch of the All-Ukrainian association "Belarus"
is a member of the Council for Ethnic Policy, supported by the head of the Rivne
Regional State Administration.
The Bulgarian Language
(Question 649 of the Committee of Experts)
The Ukrainian Centre of Bulgarian Culture is located in the building that is the
architectural monument in the city of Odessa. In the centre, there is The Sunday
school, folk dance groups and various exhibitions.
The Gagauzian language

137

(Question 649 of the Committee of Experts)
Gagauzian national cultural society "Birlik" (Odessa region) obtained premises
for 10 years at concessional terms for carrying out statutory activities.
Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum
(Question 672 of the Committee of Experts)
The region of Donetsk regularly hosts festivals, days of Greek culture,
competitions, exhibitions, children's cultural competitions, etc. The Department of
Culture and Tourism of the Donetsk regional state administration concluded
agreements (with financial support) for hosting the 2011 International Festival of
Greek culture "Mega Yorty" with the Federation of Greek Societies of Ukraine. The
branch of Greek culture in the Odessa region is located in the premises transferred by
Odessa city executive body.
Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
To organize its activities, the Kirovograd Regional communal Jewish Centre
"Hesed Shlomo" obtained premises free of charge.
To satisfy social and ethno-cultural needs of Jewish communal Charitable
Centre "Hesed-Haim" and cultural centre "Menorah" of Sumy and the City Charitable
Foundation "The Jewish community centres " Esther "and cultural centre" Lyebn" of
Konotop have obtained premises.
The Crimean Tatar language
National and cultural associations of the Crimean Tatar community cooperate
closely with the executive bodies and local governments.
The Moldovan language
All-Ukrainian national-cultural Moldovan Association obtained premises for
its statutory activities. The Moldovan national-cultural society "Izvor" in the Reni
district has its own premises too.
The German language
In the Sumy region there is a city centre of German culture "Unity" of Sumy,
which cooperates closely with the authorities.
In the Rivne region, the authorities registered two national-cultural societies of
German ethnic group, the heads of which are members of the Council for Ethnic
Policy supported by the head of the Rivne Regional State Administration.
The Polish language
Polish community obtained two-storey building - "Polish House" in Zhytomyr.

138

In the Transcarpathian region, there is a regional national-cultural society of
Poles, which cooperates with the executive authorities and local government. It
maintains close ties with non-governmental organizations in Poland and is a member
of the Federation of Polish organizations in Ukraine.
The Russian language
(Questions 662, 674 of the Committee of Experts)
In the Sumy region, the authorities registered two public organizations of
Russian minority, which work closely with authorities and cooperate with public
organizations in Russia.
In the Kherson region, there are seminars-workshops for heads of Russian
companies and heads of national amateur teams.
The Romanian language
In the Transcarpathian region, there are 4 regional national-cultural
associations of Romanians, which cooperate with authorities and organizations in
Romania.
The Slovak language
In the Transcarpathian region, there are 4 regional national-cultural
associations of Slovaks, which cooperate with authorities and organizations in
Slovakia.
The Hungarian language
In the Transcarpathian region, there are 13 regional national-cultural
associations of Hungarians and the Democratic Union of Hungarians in Ukraine.
(The questions 669, 670, 674 of the Committee of Experts)
In the Transcarpathian region, there is a Transcarpathian Regional Center of
folk art that deals with collecting, preserving and organizing the presentation of
works of national communities, including Hungarian, Polish, Slovak, Russian and
German.
Paragraph 2 Article 12 of the Charter
The Belarusian language
Conducting cultural activities by persons who speak the Belarusian language is
not prohibited in Ukraine.
The Bulgarian Language
(Question 678 of the Committee of Experts)

139

In order to conduct Youth conference, devoted to the Bulgarian language, the
Mykolayiv regional public organization "Union of Bulgarian youth" obtained 15
thousand UAH according to the budget program 5321080 "Measures to implement
the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages" from the State Committee
on Nationalities and Religions.
The Gagauzian language
Conducting cultural activities by persons who speak the Gagauzian language is
not prohibited in Ukraine.
Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
In areas of compact Greek settlement in the Donetsk region, there are cultural
activities and adequate means for their implementation.
Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
Conducting cultural activities by persons who speak the Greek minority
languages is not prohibited in Ukraine.
The Crimean Tatar language
In the cultural institutions of the Kherson region, there are centres of national
cultures: Tatar culture "Sarah Bulat" - the centre of culture and leisure, Meskhetian
Turkish culture "Akhaltsikhe" - Chaplinsky district, cultural and educational centre of
Tatar "Byrlyk" - in the city of Genichesk.
The Moldovan language
Conducting cultural activities and facilities by persons who speak the
Moldovan language is not prohibited in Ukraine.
The German language
In the city of Kherson, there is the city centre of German culture, the regional
branch of the German Society of Ukraine "Wiedergeburt."
The Polish language
Conducting cultural activities by persons who speak the Polish language is not
prohibited in Ukraine.
The Russian language
Conducting cultural activities by persons who speak the Russian language is
not prohibited in Ukraine.
The Romanian language

140

Conducting cultural activities by persons who speak the Romanian language is
not prohibited in Ukraine.
The Slovak language
Conducting cultural activities by persons who speak the Slovak language is not
prohibited in Ukraine.
The Hungarian language
Conducting cultural activities by persons who speak the Hungarian language is
not prohibited in Ukraine.
Paragraph 3 Article 12 of the Charter
The Belarusian language
In the Donetsk region, the authorities pay due attention to the cooperation of
Belarusian public associations in the region with their compatriots.
In 2011, the Department of Culture, Tourism and Cultural Heritage Protection
of Chernihiv Regional State Administration signed an agreement on cooperation in
culture with the Department of Culture of Gomel Executive Committee (Belarus).
The Bulgarian Language
The authorities try to pay due attention to cultural policy abroad for the
Bulgarian language and culture.
The Gagauzian language
The authorities try to pay due attention to cultural policy abroad for the
Gagauzian language and culture.
Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
The city community of Nizhyn established friendly relations with the city of
Yaniny (Greece).
Every year the Consul General of Greece Yerasymos Davarys comes to
Odessa. He holds meetings with the mayor and the governor of the city and gets
closely in touch with the Greek community.
Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
Creative teams of the Jewish minority are constantly involved in various
activities at an international level with the aim of cultural exchange.
The Crimean Tatar language

141

Creative teams and representatives of the Crimean Tatar minority are
constantly involved in various activities at an international level with the aim of
cultural exchange.
The Moldovan language
The Odessa region is one of the founders and an active member of Euroregion
"Lower Danube" the agreement, which was signed at a meeting of heads of border
regions of Ukraine (Odessa region), Romania (counties Breyila, Galati, Tulcea) and
the Republic of Moldova (Vulcaneshti areas, Cahul Cantemir). The purpose of
creating the Euroregion was to achieve a harmonious and balanced development of
the regions – members, in all spheres of life.
The German language
The authorities of the Donetsk region pay due attention to popularizing of the
cultural heritage of Germans on the territory of their historical motherland (festivals,
exhibitions, youth festivals, seminars, conferences, exchange of cultural delegations,
etc.)
The Polish language
The authorities of the Donetsk region pay due attention to popularizing of the
cultural heritage of Poles on the territory of their historical motherland (festivals,
exhibitions, youth festivals, seminars, conferences, exchange of cultural delegations,
etc.)
Pupils and students from twin-cities of Uman and Gniezno took part in an
international project of the Polish-Ukrainian exchange "Know each other - know
ourselves."
The Russian language
In 2010, the Luhansk region of Ukraine concluded an agreement with the
Rostov region of the Russian Federation on the creation of territory of cross-border
cooperation "Euroregion" Donbass ".
Today, the Cherkasy region has 7 agreements concluded, which envisage
cultural exchanges of theatres, teams, festivals, etc.
The Romanian language
The authorities of the Transcarpathian region concluded agreements on
creative relationships, exchange of creative teams, participation in festivals and
exhibitions abroad.
Chernivtsi City Council together with the City Council of Suceava (Romania)
and the City Council of Kympulun-Moldovenesk (Romania) implemented a crossborder cooperation project "Promotion of common cultural heritage in cross-border

142

region" Chernivtsi – Suceava "under the Neighbourhood Programme" RomaniaUkraine ".
The Slovak language
The authorities are considering opening the Uzhhorod Centre of Slovak
Culture.
The Hungarian language
The Department of Culture of the Transcarpathian Regional State
Administration of Ukraine concluded an agreement on cultural collaboration with the
State self-government of Ukrainians in Hungary and the Society of Ukrainian Culture
in Hungary.

3.6. Economic and social life (Article 13 of the Charter)
Since the First Periodical report was submitted, Ukrainian legislation has not
undergone any changes concerning language usage in economic and social life. As
stated in the previous report, The Law of Ukraine "On Languages in Ukrainian SSR"
determines the issues on governing public relations in the sphere of the
comprehensive development and use of the Ukrainian and other languages used by
the population of the Republic in the state, economic, political and public life,
to protect the constitutional rights of citizens in this sphere, to develop the
respectful attitude to the national dignity of an individual, his/her culture and
language, etc. Pursuant to Article 8 of the said Law of Ukraine Any privileges
or limitations of rights of an individual on a linguistic basis, the linguistic
discrimination shall not be permitted. Any public humiliation or disrespect,
deliberate distortion of the Ukrainian or other languages in official documents
and texts, creation of obstacles and restrictions in the use thereof, advocating of
the enmity on a linguistic basis shall be subject to legal prosecution. Article 11 of
the aforementioned document defines that the Ukrainian language shall be
the language of activities, records and documents, as well as the relations
of the state, party, public bodies, enterprises, institutions and organizations in
Ukraine. The technical and design documents in Ukraine shall be produced in
Ukrainian or Russian In cases, stipulated by part two of Article 3 of this Law,
any national language may be used together with the Ukrainian language in
activities of the state, party, public bodies, enterprises, institutions and
organizations located in corresponding places, or as its stipulated in part three of the
same Article - a language acceptable for the given area.
3.7. Transfrontier exchanges (Article 14 of the Charter)

143

Since the First Periodical Report was submitted, Ukrainian legislation has not
undergone any changes concerning transfrontier exchanges.

Information on consultations held by the Ministry of Education and Science,
Youth and Sports of Ukraine with the speakers, representatives and heads of
public organizations and the members of the Public Council of Heads of
Education programs of All-Ukrainian Associations of national minorities of
Ukraine, in terms of drafting the Second Periodical Report of Ukraine on
Implementation of the European Charter for Regional or Minority Languages.

The Belarusian language
Date and
place of
consultations

05/25/2011
the city of
Odessa

06/14/2011
the city of
Kyiv

Contents of issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

The names and
initials of representatives
of public organizations,
their positions.

To
assist
with
Kovalevich
FP,
increasing the number of chairman of the Odessa
Sunday
schools,
where regional
public
Belarusian would be taught. association
"Belarus",
deputy chairman of the
All-Ukrainian Union of
Belarusians of Ukraine,
member of the Public
Council of Heads of
educational programs of
All-Ukrainian
associations of national
minorities of Ukraine.
Orzhehivska I.A.,
chairman of the AllUkrainian Union of
Belarusians of Ukraine

Comment of the
Ministry

Ministry,
local
education authorities will
promote the activities of
Sunday schools, where the
Belarusian language would
be taught, the creation of
which will be initiated by the
Belarusian community.

144

During the consultations, the representatives of Belarusian organizations noted that the lack of applications
for teaching in the Belarusian language and its study in schools can be explained by the peculiarities of the
mentality of the Belarusians, some historical reasons, etc. In their view, there is no need to provide preschool, general secondary, vocational, higher education and adult education in Belarusian.

The Bulgarian Language
Date and
place of
consultations

05/25/2011
the city of
Odessa

05/25/2011
village of
Novoselivka,
Kiliya district of
the Odessa
region.

Contents
of
issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

The names and
initials of
representatives of
public organizations,
their positions.

Comment of the
Ministry

Promote opportunities
Hramatik
Y.I.,
for studying the Bulgarian president
of
the
language for pupils of Congress of Bulgarians
Bulgarian origin in secondary of Ukraine
schools where it is not taught
and increase the number of
class-hours in the Bulgarian
language

The Ministry and
local
authorities
will
promote
studying
the
Bulgarian
language
by
students of the Bulgarian
origin in case we reaceive a
sufficient
number
of
applications. The Ministry
developed a multivariate
Typical curricula for various
types of secondary schools.
The school itself chooses the
curriculum plan.

To establish nationwide
students' competitions in the
Bulgarian language.

The issue is under
consideration
in
the
Ministry.

Practically there are
no textbooks in the Bulgarian
language for pupils of
secondary schools, published
in Ukraine. It is necessary to
proceed to their planned
release.

Drahnyeva S.I,,
vice president of the
Association o thef
Bulgarians of Ukraine,
member of the Public
Council of Heads of
educational programs

It is planned that from
the 2011/2012 academic
year, textbooks in Bulgarian
language in accordance with
new curricula and for the
corresponding grades (from
the 1st) will be published.

145

Facilitate
the
procedure of nostrification of
diplomas obtained by the
Bulgarian language teachers in
the Republic of Bulgaria.

of
All-Ukrainian
Ministry considers the
Associations of national possibility of amending the
minorities of Ukraine; relevant
international
Hramatik
S.M., agreement.
chairman
of
the
Bulgarian Society of
the village of Kulebchi,
members
of
the
Association of the
Bulgarians of Ukraine,
members of parent
councils,
leaders,
teachers of schools,
where the Bulgarian
language is taught, staff
of cultural institutions
and heads of village
councils,
where
Bulgarians live.

During the consultations, the representatives of public organizations of the Bulgarians claimed that
there was no need to provide vocational education and adult education in Bulgarian.
The Armenian language
Date and
place of
consultations

05/23/2011
the city of
Simferopol

Contents of issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

The names and
initials of
representatives of
public organizations,
their positions.

Comment of the
Ministry

Consider studying the
R.S. Akopyan,
elements of the Armenian head of the Crimean
language and culture in pre- Armenian
Society,
school institutions.
Salista-Grigoryan
T.A., deputy head of
the
association,
Director of Alternative
Armenian schools and
To promote the study members
of
the
of Armenian language as a Society of Armenian
subject in one of the general language teachers.
educational institutions of
Simferopol.

This study can be
arranged in case we receive
sufficient
number
of
applications from parents to
provide additional educational
services, availability of staff
and curriculum plans.

Assist in organizing
the study of Armenian
language in one of the higher
educational institutions of the
Autonomous Republic of

Establishing
the
departments (divisions) of the
Armenian language at the
Faculty or departments of
foreign languages in higher

In case we receive a
sufficient
number
of
applications, the issue will be
considered in accordance with
laws of Ukraine.

146

Crimea.

07/06/2011
the city of
Lviv

education institutions of the
Autonomous Republic of
Crimea is subject to a license
and the issue of additional
funding.

Consider recognition
K.G, Sargsyan,
Ministry considers the
of teacher training of head of the Armenian possibility of amending the
Armenian
language community of the Lviv relevant
international
diplomas, issued in Armenia. region.
"Ahpyur", agreement.
deputy head of the
community,
R.V.
Mkrtchyan, Director
of
the
Armenian
Sunday school and
members of the parent
committee of the
school, teachers of the
Armenian language

The Gagauzian language
Date and
place of
consultations

05/25/2011
village of
Old Troianu,
Kiliya district of
Odessa region.

Contents
of
issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

Practically there are no
textbooks in the Gagauzian
language for pupils of
secondary schools, published
in Ukraine. It is necessary to
proceed to their planned
release.

The names and
initials of
representatives of
public organizations,
their positions.

Kulaksis O.S.,
chairman
of
the
society
"Berlik"
teacher
of
the
Gagauzian language;
Moldovan D.D., head
of
Stari
Troiany
village, members of
Provide creative holiday the Union of the
for the Gagauzian language Gagauzians
of
teachers involved in the Ukraine,
Society
creation of textbooks.
"Berlik", members of
parent
councils,
leaders,
school
teachers, where the
Gagauzian language is
taught, staff of preschools and cultural

Comment of the
Ministry

It is planned that from
the 2011/2012 academic
year, textbooks in Gagauzian
language in accordance with
new curricula and for the
corresponding grades (from
the 1st) will be published.
Issues
will
be
considered by the education
management bodies in the
Odessa region in accordance
with
the
procedure
established by law.

147

institutions

06/14/2011
the city of
Kyiv

Promote
the
organization
of
teacher
training in the Gagauzian
language at the Komrat
University
(Republic
of
Moldova).

Arnaut F. I.,
chairman of the AllUkrainian
public
organization "Union of
Gagauzians
of
Ukraine", member of
the Public Council of
Heads of educational
programs
of
AllUkrainian associations
of national minorities
of Ukraine.

Issues
will
be
considered by the education
management bodies in the
Odessa region in accordance
with
the
procedure
established by law.

During the consultations, the representatives of public organizations of Gagauzians claimed that
there was no need to provide pre-school, general secondary, vocational, higher education and adult education
in Gagauzian language.

Greek minority languages: Modern Greek, Romani and Urum.
Date and
place of
consultations

16/04/2011
the city of
Mariupol,
Donetsk region),

Contents of issues
The names and
raised by representatives of
initials of
public organizations.
representatives of public
organizations, their
positions.
To confer the status of
ProtsenkoAll-Ukrainian
on
the Pichadzhi O.I. Head of
student's competition in the Federation of Greek
Modern Greek language.
Communities
of
Ukraine; Dobra O.M.
Promote
the head of department of
preservation of existing and education
of
the
opening new specialized Federation, member of
schools with advanced study the Public Council of
of the Greek language in Heads of educational
areas densely populated by programs
of
AllGreeks.
Ukrainian Associations
of national minorities of
Ukraine, members of
parent councils, leaders,
teachers of schools,
where
the
Modern
Greek,
Urum
and

Comment of the
Ministry

The issue is under
consideration in the Ministry.

Issues
will
be
considered by local education
management bodies in case
they receive a sufficient
number of applications in
accordance
with
the
procedure established by law.

148

Romani
taught.

language

is

During the consultations with the representatives of public organizations of Greeks said that there
was no need to provide pre-school, general secondary, vocational, higher education and adult education in
New Greek, Urum and Romani languages.

Jewish minority Languages: Hebrew and Yiddish
Date and
place of
consultations

06/16/2011
the city of
Kyiv

Contents of issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

The names and
initials of representatives
of public organizations,
their positions.

Comment of the
Ministry

Monastyrsky A.I.,
The matter will be
president of the Jewish considered by the Ministry
Forum
of
Ukraine, in cooperation with scientific
chairman of the Jewish institutions and universities.
Foundation of Ukraine,
Chairman of the Public
Council of Heads of
educational
programs,
All-Ukrainian
associations of national
On the basis of the minorities of Ukraine.
The matter will be
Borys Grinchenko Kyiv
considered by the Ministry
University
to
establish
jointly with the Department
teacher training courses in
of Education and Science
Yiddish.
of
Kyiv
City
State
For the revival of
Yiddish in Ukraine to create
a
laboratory
involving
experts in language and
literature, who can create
programs and textbooks in
modern Yiddish.

Administration and the
Borys Hrinchenko Kyiv
University.
To
establish
the
department of the Jewish
language and literature at the
Faculty of Philology at the
Yuri Fedkovych Chernivtsi
National University.
06/16/2011
the city of
Kyiv

Create a curriculum
Bakulina
N.V.,
plan on Hebrew as a foreign head of the Project-camp
language for pupils of the "Sources of Tolerance"
1st-11th grades.
of the Congress of
National Communities of
Ukraine, Secretary of the
Public Council of Heads
of educational programs,

The matter will
considered by the Ministry
jointly with the Yuriy
Fedkovych
Chernivtsi
National University.
In 2011, a curriculum
plan for 1-4 classes was
elaborated
and
recommended
by
the
Ministry
for
use
in
secondary
schools,
a
curriculum plan for 5-11
grades will be established

149

All-Ukrainian
after approval of the new
associations of national version of the State standard
minorities of Ukraine.
of basic and full secondary
education.
06/30/2011
the city of
Kyiv

Promote
the
Levitas
I.M.,
The Ministry, local
importance of studying president of the National authorities will assist in this
Yiddish for its preservation Societies of Ukraine, issue.
among parents.
president of the Jewish
Council of Ukraine,
member of the Public
Council of Heads of
educational
programs,
All-Ukrainian
associations of national
minorities of Ukraine.

During the consultations, the representatives of public organizations of Jews claimed that there was
no need to provide pre-school, general secondary, vocational, higher education and adult education in
Hebrew and Yiddish languages.

The Karaite language
Date and
place of
consultations

05/23/2011
the city of
Simferopol

24/05/2011

Contents of issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

The names and
initials of
representatives of
public organizations,
their positions.

Organize department of
learning
the
language,
literature and culture of
Crimean Karaites in the
Research Center of the
Crimean Engineering and
Pedagogical
University,
which would become the
center of the study and
preservation of the Karaim
language as an integral part of
historical
and
cultural
heritage of Ukraine (by the
staffing provision).

Ormeli
V.Y.,
chairman
of
the
Association of Crimean
Karaites
"Krymkaraylar"
Kropotova
N.V.,
member
of
the
Scientific Council of
the Association.

Assist

the

Sunday

Tiriyaky

V.Z.,

Comment of the
Ministry

The
Ministry
of
Education
and
Science,
Youth and Sport of the
Autonomous Republic of
Crimea
and
the
administration of the Crimean
Engineering-Pedagogical
University
employed
teaching staff to provide
courses in the Karaite and
Crimean Tatar languages on
the request of the KaraiteKrimchak
and
nationalcultural societies.
The

Board

of

150

the city of
Evpatoria,
Crimea.

School, where the Karaite chairman of Spiritual
language is studied .
Management of Karaite
religious organizations
of Ukraine, Head of
Karaite
religious
community,
hazzan,
Sinani S. B., head of
Evpatoria
nationalcultural
society
"Kardashlar".

Education of the Municipal
Council of Evpatoriia issued
an order, under which from
September 1, 2011 an interschool extracurricular classes
in minority languages shall
be organized, including the
Karaite language.

The Crimean Tatar language
Date and
place of
consultations

05/23/2011
the city of
Simferopol

Contents of issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

The names and
initials of representatives
of public organizations,
their positions.

The situation of the
Crimean Tatar language
education and its study is
not satisfactory, the absolute
majority of the Crimean
Tatar people do not receive
education in their native
language.
Since
the
curriculum plans must be
funded at the expense of
local budgets, there are
numerous cases when local
authorities
for
various
reasons refused to finance
the study of the Crimean
Tatar language. It is
necessary to build new
schools, renovate existing
ones, increase the number of
class-hours for the Crimean
Tatar language.

Kadzhametov S.,
deputy of the Verkhovna
Rada of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea, head
of the Association of
Crimean-Tatar teachers
"Maarifchi", deputy head
of Public Council of
Heads of educational
programs,All-Ukrainian
associations of national
minorities of Ukraine;
Useinov S.M., head of
the national council of
education
of
the
Association "Maarifchi",
Fazyl R., head of the
Union of Crimean Tatar
writers, Ilyasova B.A.
head
of
monitoring
comission
of
the
Association "Maarfichi",
E. Bariev, honourable
president of Crimean
Tatar
youth
center;
lecturers, teachers of
Crimean
Tatar
and
scholars.

Comment of the
Ministry

Issues
will
be
considered
by
local
education
management
bodies in case they receive a
sufficient
number
of
applications in accordance
with
the
procedure
established by law. The
Ministry
developed
a
multivariate
Typical
curricula for various types of
secondary schools. The
school itself chooses the
curriculum plan. The issue of
building and reconstruction
of schools is to be redolved
within the framework of the
program of resettlement of
deported Crimean Tatars and
other nationalities who have
returned to live in Ukraine,
their
adaptation
and
integration into Ukrainian
society. Draft Resolution of
the Cabinet of Ministers of
Ukraine for the extension of
the program is under
consideration by the central
executive authorities.

151

For three years the
reconstructed
pre-school
institution with the Crimean
language of teaching of
Belohorsk has not started its
functioning.

The
pre-school
institution
is
to
be
commissioned
in
the
2011/2012 academic year.

In
the
district
education departments of
the Autonomous Republic
of Crimea there is is no staff
responsible for the Crimean
Tatar language.

According to the
distribution of functional
responsibilities managers or
specialists of education
management bodies are in
charge of these issues. In
addition, the district offices
empoly teaching staff of the
Crimean Tatar language and
literature.

It is necessary to
restore
education
management in the Crimean
Tatar language in the
Ministry of Education,
Youth and Sport of the
Autonomous Republic of
Crimea represented by not
less than 5 workers.

Since at present there
is a reduction of the state
apparatus,
including
education authorities, the
proposal cannot be realized.
The structure of the Ministry
of Education, Youth and
Sports of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea includes
educational
sector
in
Crimean Tatar.

It is necessary to
increase staff of teaching
laboratory of education in
the Crimean Tatar language
at
the
Institute
of
postgraduate education (up
to 5 workers).

At this time the
laboratory
employs
2
workers. The issue of
expanding the staff will be
considered in case of
financing.

The Crimean Tatar
language should be included
in the list of subjects for the
external
independent
examination for admission
to
higher
educational
institutions to education
direction "Philology" for
appropriate specialization.

The proposal to take
into account the Crimean
Tatar language for admission
to
higher
educational
establishment
was
considered by the Ministry
and the Crimean Tatar
language was included into
the list of admission
examinations
at
higher
educational establishments
for 2012. The higher

152

education institution can
substitute an exam in foreign
language for an exam in
Crimean Tatar.
From year to year the
problem
of
national
professional education for
pre-school,
primary
education and specialists in
the subjects for institutions
with the Crimean Tatar
language
of
teaching
remains unsettled.

Specialists
for
preschool and elementary
education in Crimean Tatar
are trained by universities of
I-IV levels of accreditation
in the Crimea. The issue of
improvement of this activity,
as well as the introduction of
special courses for teachers
are under consideration.

During the consultations, the representatives of public organizations of Crimean Tatars claimed that
there was no need to provide vocational education in the Crimean Tatar language.

The Krimchak language
Date and
place of
consultations

05/23/2011
the city of
Simferopol

Contents of issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

The names and
initials of representatives
of public organizations,
their positions.

to assist Sunday
Pirkova
D.A.,
schools,
where
the chairman of the Crimean
Cultural
Krimchak language is Republican
taught.
Society of Krimchaks
"Krymchahlar"; Purim
to
assist
in Y.M.,
honorary
employing teachers of chairman of the Society.
Krimchak at the Crimean
Engineering
and
Pedagogical University.

Comment of the
Ministry

Education management
bodies will assist the Sunday
school.

The
Ministry
of
Education and Science, Youth
and Sport of the Autonomous
Republic of Crimea is
considering the issue.

The Moldovan language
Date and place
of consultations

Contents of issues
The names and
raised by representatives
initials of
of public organizations.
representatives of public
organizations, their
positions.

Comment of the
Ministry

153

05/25/2011
village of
Pryozerne
the district of
Kiliya,
region of Odessa.

Facilitate
the
procedure
of
nostrification of diplomas
obtained by Moldovan
language teachers in the
Republic of Moldova.
There
are
not
enough textbooks and
visual aids for teaching
the Moldovan language.

It is not clear why
in Ukraine teachers of the
Moldovan language are
not trained, while the
Izmail State Humanities
University
provides
courses on the Romanian
language. It is important
to begin training teachers
of the Moldovan language
at the Mechnikov Odessa
National University.

The issue is under
consideration
in
the
Fetesku A.S., president Ministry.
of the All-Ukrainian
national and acultural
Moldovan Association;
Burlia O.K., head of the
Reni district society of
In 2011, textbook in
Moldovan
culture the Moldovan language for
"Izvor"; Bodarev S.P., the 7th grade was published,
head
of
Bilhorod- which
had
not
been
Dinstrovskyi Moldovan published before. It is
cultutral
and planned that from the
educational
society; 2011/2012 academic year,
Chepoi H.H. head of textbooks in Moldovan
Ismail
regional language in accordance with
Moldovan
cultural new curricula and for the
society, members of corresponding grades (from
Moldovan
societies, the 1st) will be published.
members of parent
councils, leaders, school
teachers, where the
Moldovan language is
taught, staff of preschools and cultural
institutions, heads of
villages
where
The question is being
Moldovans live.
considered by the Ministry
jointly with the Izmail State
Humanitarian University and
the
Mechnikov
Odessa
National
University.

154

It is desirable to
have more class-hours of
the Moldovan language in
secondary schools with
education in Ukrainian.

The
Ministry
developed a multivariate
Typical
curriculum
for
various types of secondary
schools. The school itself
chooses the curriculum plan.

It is necessary that
curricula and textbooks in
Ukrainian language for
secondary schools with
instruction in Moldovan
be different from those
for schools with education
in Ukrainian.

In 2011, curriculum in
Ukrainian language for 1st4th grades for schools with
education in Moldovan were
elaborated and approved of.
Relevant textbooks are being
prepared. This proposal will
be taken into account in the
future.

It is necessary to
publish the UkrainianMoldovan and MoldovanUkrainian
school
dictionaries
in
all
subjects.

The issue will be
considered by the Ministry
and
the
Institute
of
Innovative Technology and
Educational Content.

155

01/06/2011
village of
Boiany
district of
Novoselytsia,

Promote learning
an
optional
course
"History of the Moldovan
people
in
secondary
schools of the district.

01/06/2011
village of Boiany
district of Novoselytsia,
Chernivtsi region.

Secondary schools of
the district provide optional
course "History of the
Moldovan people."

Chernivtsi
region.

During the consultations, the representatives of Moldovan public organizations claimed that there
was no need to provide vocational education in Moldovan. Consultations with representatives of public
organizations of Moldovans in the Chernivtsi region also showed that there was no need to provide preschool
education in Moldovan in this region.

The German language
Date and
place of
consultations

23/06/2011
the city of
Kyiv

Contents of issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

The names and
initials of
representatives of
public organizations,
their positions.

German
language
Leysle
V.I.,
textbook
for
secondary leader of the Germans
schools are not always of high of
Ukraine,
quality.
Kovalenko-Schneider
L.P., head of the
German school club
"August," the Center
of German Culture
"Wiedershtral" in the
city of Kyiv

Comment of the
Ministry

The Ministry sought to
provide specific comments on
certain textbooks for their
examination by the relevant
scientific and methodical
commissions.

During the consultations, representatives of public organizations of Germans claimed that there was
no need to provide general secondary, vocational education and continuing education in German there.

The Polish language
Date and
place of

Contents
of
issues
raised by representatives of

The names and
initials of
representatives of

Comment of the
Ministry

156

consultations

06/08/2011
the city of
Lviv

public organizations.

public organizations,
their positions.

To
timely
provide
Kheliova E.P.,
secondary
schools
with head of the Federation
textbooks, including textbook of Polish organizations
in Polish.
of Ukraine, Khlopek
A.B., head of Union of
Contribute
to
the teachers of Polish of
creation of cultural and Ukraine, member of
educational centre of the Public Council of
Polish
minority
in Heads of educational
the city of Vinnytsia, because programs,Allthe issue has remained Ukrainian associations
unsettled for several years.
of national minorities
of Ukraine, Istoshyn
To establish nationwide
V.M. chair of the
students' competitions in the
charity
Foundation
Polish language.
"Svitlytsia Polska" in
the Vinnytsia region,
members of parent
councils,
leaders,
school teachers, where
the Polish language is
taught

The issue is under the
control of the Ministry.

The
Ministry
forwarded a relevant letter to
the Mayor of Vinnytsia, the
issue is under consideration.

The issue is under
consideration in the Ministry.

During the consultations, representatives of public organizations of Poles said that there was no
need to provide vocational education and continuing education in Polish.

The Romani language
Date and
place of
consultations

05/18/2011
the city of
Uzhhorod

05/25/2011

Contents of issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

The names and
initials of representatives
of public organizations,
their positions.

to create separate
groups for members of the
Romani minority in preschool institutions, where
teachers of Romani minority
could also teach.

Buchko
B.P.,
chairman
of
the
Transcarpathian
Regional
Romani
Society "Romani Chhib"

Comment of the
Ministry

Creation of separate
groups for members of one
nationality is considered
purposless. Educators of
preschool
education
institutions should take into
account the peculiarities of
children, including Romani.

to consider fixing a
Yermoshkin S.M.,
Fixing
quota for Romani minority chairman of the Odessa impossible

quotas
because

is
it

157

the city of
Odessa

for admission in pedagogical Regional
Romani
institutions.
Congress, Secretary of
the Romani Council of
to create regional Ukraine
evening schools for the
Romani minority.

contradicts the requirements
of the legislation.

to create scientific and
educational advisory board
with
representatives
of
teachers of Romani.

The
matter
will
beconsidered by education
management boards.

to assist in creating a
website for distribution of
materials for studying the
Romani language and for
Romani education.

The issue will be
considered by the Ministry
jointly with the Institute of
Innovative Technology and
Educational Content.

The matter will be
considered by education
management boards.

The Russian language
Date and
place of
consultations

05/19/2011
the city of
Kyiv

The names and
initials of
representatives of
public organizations,
their positions.

In Ukraine, the law
prohibits the creation of preschools institutions with the
Russian
language
of
education. it is necessary to
restore such institutions.

Shurov
K.V.,
head of the Ukrainian
organization "Russian
Community
of
Ukraine," a member of
the Public Council of
Heads of educational
programs,
AllUkrainian associations
of national minorities
of Ukraine.

This
does
not
correspond to actual state of
affairs. In Ukraine, there are
1012 pre-schools institutions
with the Russian language of
education.

V.A. Korsakov,
chairman
of
the
Association
of
Teachers of the Russian
Language
and

These projects are
published on the official
website of the Ministry for
discussion; proposals may be
made also during the

to introduce courses on
the Russian language in
secondary schools, especially
in those with the Ukrainian
language of education, while
following the laws and
regulations of Ukraine..

24/05/2011
the city of
Kyiv

Comment of the
Ministry

Contents of issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

To
consider
and
discuss draft projects and
official
documents
concerning the education of
minorities with the public.

Language courses are
optional for children and their
parents.
The
Ministry
developed a multivariate
Typical
curriculum
for
various types of secondary
schools. The school itself
chooses the curriculum plan.

158

05/30/2011
the city of
Kyiv

06/06/2011
the city of
Kyiv

Literature,
board
member
of
the
Ukrainian Society of
Russian Culture "Rus",
Deputy Chairman of
the Public Council of
Heads of educational
programs
of
AllUkrainian associations
of national minorities
of Ukraine.

meetings of the Public
Council
of
Heads
of
educational programs of AllUkrainian associations of
national
minorities
of
Ukraine and its members.
The proposal will be taken
into consideration by the
Ministry.

Pashkov V.V.,
Co-Chair of the High
Council of the Board of
the Ukrainian Union of
public
organizations
"Association
of
compatriots
Russian
Union", a member of
the Public Council of
Heads of educational
programs
of
AllUkrainian associations
of national minorities
of Ukraine.

Network of secondary
schools are formed by local
authorities
and
local
governments pursuant to
applications filed by parents.
Recently, reduction of the
network
of
educational
institutions has been related
to the general demographic
situation in the country, while
the number of first-graders,
including those who are
educated in Russian, is
constantly increasing.

to establish the Faculty
A.V.
Potapov,
of Russian culture at one of president
of
the
the universities.
Ukrainian
national
cultural and educational
society
"Russian
Assembly"; member of
to study the works of the Public Council of
Russian literature in the Heads of educational
original language.
programs
of
AllUkrainian associations
of national minorities
of Ukraine.

History
and
the
phenomenon of Russian
culture is taught both in
general and in special courses
at many universities.

to include the works of
contemporary Russian writers
of Ukraine into curricular.

These
works
are
included in the curricular; the
proposal will be considered
by the Ministry.

there is a tendency for
forced reduction of secondary
schools with the Russian
language of education and
change of their status
(transition
of
these
institutions into those with
the Ukrainian language of
education).

The Romanian language

The
Ministry
recommends studying the
works of world literature,
including Russian both in the
Ukrainian language and in
the original (on the request of
teachers and pupils).

159

Date and
place of
consultations

05/19/2011
the city of
Uzhhorod

01/06/2011
the city of
Chernivtsi

Contents of issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

the city of
Chernivtsi

Comment of the Ministry

to provide highquality translation of the
tasks of the state final
examinations and final
examinations for pupils of
the 5th-8th grades.

Oprish
Y.M.,
The issue is under the
Head
of
Socio- control of the Ministry.
Cultural Community
of
Transcarpathian
Romanians
named
after
D.ZH.
Kozhbuka;
Oprish
The issue is under
To
establish M.M., Director of
nationwide
students' secondary school № 2 consideration in the Ministry.
competitions
in
the of Solotvyn, Tiachiv
Romanian language.
district,
Transcarpathian
region.
to take in account the
knowledge
of
the
Romanian language and
literature when admitting
students
to
higher
education institutions, for
the training direction of
"Philology
(Romanian
language and literature)."

to
establish
the
Multilanguage University
in
the city of Chernivtsi

01/06/2011

The names and
initials of
representatives of
public organizations,
their positions.

Buku
V.M.,
Head of the Chernivtsi
regional association of
Romanian
culture
named
after
M.
Eminescu

The proposal to take into
account the Romanian language
for
admission
to
higher
educational establishment was
considered by the Ministry and
the Romanian language was
included into the list of
admission
examinations
at
higher
educational
establishments for 2012. The
higher education institution can
substitute an exam in foreign
language for an exam in
Romanian.
The authorities have not
received any application for
establishing a state university of
this kind. The procedure of
establishing
private
higher
education
institutions
is
specified by law.

to revoke the order of
Levchik Y.S.,
This procedure meets
the Ministry on the head of Art Center THE
HAGUE
implementation of the "Renaissance""
of RECOMMENDATIONS
study of certain subjects in Chernivtsi.
REGARDING
THE
secondary schools with the
EDUCATION RIGHTS OF
Romanian language of
NATIONAL MINORITIES of
High Commissioner on National

160

01/06/2011
the city of
Chernivtsi

01/06/2011
the city of
Chernivtsi

education in Ukrainian.

Minorities of OSCE, according
to which during education in
secondary
schools,
it
is
necessary to gradually increase
the number of subjects taught in
the official language.

to provide general
education institutions with
the Romanian language of
education with qualified
teachers
of
Ukrainian
language and literature,
such as graduates of Yuriy
Fedkovych
National
University of Chernivtsi,
but not with former
teachers of Russian.

According to the Principal
Department of Education and
Science of Chernivtsi Regional
State Administration, general
education
institutions
are
provided with qualified teachers
of the Ukrainian language and
literature. Preference is given to
graduates
of
the
Yuriy
Fedkovych National University
of Chernivtsi

To introduce the
Opayits A.S.,
The authorities have not
course on history and chairman
of
the received any applications from
geography in Romanian at League of Human students for the abovementioned
issue.
the
Yuriy
Fedkovych Rights.
National University of
Chernivtsi
Implement
classbooks in Romanian in
secondary schools with the
Romanian language of
education.

keeping documents in
secondary schools, including
classbooks is carried out in
accordance with law.

not to open classes
with
the
Ukrainian
language of education in
secondary
with
the
Romanian language of
instruction.

The right of choice of a
language of education belongs to
pupils and their parents.
Network of secondary schools
are formed by local authorities
and local governments pursuant
to applications filed by parents.

to
delineate
an
integrated
course
"Literature (Romanian and
world)" and introduce
courses
"Romanian
Literature" and "World
Literature".
not to open classes
with
the
Ukrainian

Terytsanu V.D.,
The
proposal
chairman
of
the considered purposeless.
Regional
Cultural
Foundation "House of
the
Romanian
language"

is

The right of choice of a
language of education belongs to

161

02/06/2011
the city of
Chernivtsi

language of education in
secondary
with
the
Romanian language of
instruction.

pupils and their parents.
Network of secondary schools
are formed by local authorities
and local governments pursuant
to applications filed by parents.

to provide libraries
of secondary schools with
literature in the native
language, including works
in accordance with the
curriculum.

the
Ministry
issues
textbooks for secondary schools
at the expense of the budget
program.
Foreign
book
acquisition for school libraries is
carried out according to the
budgest
of
educational
institutions and funded by local
authorities.

not to open classes
with
the
Ukrainian
language of education in
secondary
with
the
Romanian language of
instruction.

to ensure the right to
higher education in the
mother tongue at the Yuriy
Fedkovych
National
University of Chernivtsi.

To add disciplines
"Romanian language and
literature" to the list of
exams
to
obtain
philological education at
universities.

Bozhesku A.V.,
executive secretary of
the
Interregional
Association
"Romanian
Community
of
Ukraine," a member
of the Public Council
of
Heads
of
educational programs
of
All-Ukrainian
associations
of
national minorities of
Ukraine.

The right of choice of a
language of education belongs to
pupils and their parents.
Network of secondary schools
are formed by local authorities
and local governments pursuant
to applications filed by parents.
The authorities have not
received any applications from
students for the abovementioned
issue. The Yuriy Fedkovych
National
University
of
Chernivtsi provides courses on
the Romanian language and has
the appropriate Department.
The proposal to take into
account the Romanian language
for
admission
to
higher
educational establishment was
considered by the Ministry and
the Romanian language was
included into the list of
admission
examinations
at
higher
educational
establishments for 2012. The
higher education institution can
substitute an exam in foreign
language for an exam in
Romanian.

During the consultations, the representatives of public organizations of Romanians claimed that there
was no need to provide vocational education in the Romanian language.

162

The Slovak language
Date and
place of
consultations

05/18/2011
the city of
Uzhhorod

05/19/2011
the city of
Uzhhorod

Contents
of
issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

The names and
initials of
representatives of
public organizations,
their positions.

Comment of the
Ministry

to allocate funds to
S.N.
The above issues
finance
the
Ukrainian Pakhomova, Head of should be settled directly at
scientific-methodological
the department of the the university while planning
Slovak philology at the costs for the new fiscal year.
for the centre of Uzhgorod
National
Slovak studies, established by University, Doctor of
the
Uzhgorod
National Letters, Full Professor.
University, to purchase a
multimedia projector.
Implement studying the
Haynish Y.Y.,
Slovak language as a subject chairman
of
the
in other parts of the regional cultural and
Transcarpathian region.
educational
organization "Matica
Slovenska
in
Transcarpathia"

The right of choice of
a language of education
belongs to pupils and their
parents.
Network
of
secondary
schools
are
formed by local authorities
and
local
governments
pursuant to applications filed
by parents. In case the
authorities
receive
a
sufficient
number
of
application for studying the
Slovak language, the issue
will be considered in
accordance with law.

During the consultations, the representatives of public organizations of Slovaks claimed that there
was no need to provide vocational education and adult education in the Slovak language.

The Hungarian language

Date and place
of consultations

Contents of issues
raised by representatives of
public organizations.

The names and
initials of
representatives of public

Comment of the
Ministry

163

organizations, their
positions.
05/18/2011
the city of
Berehove, the region
of Transcarpathia

To add disciplines
"Hungarian language and
literature" to the list of
exams to obtain philological
education at universities.

To ensure teaching
history and culture of the
Hungarian people as a
subject in schools with the
Hungarian language of
instruction at the expense of
the invariant part of the
curriculum.

Oros I.I., head of
Transcarpathian
pedagogical community,
Berki K.I., deputy head
of
Transcarpathian
pedagogical community,
Brenzovych V.I., head
of the commission for
budget of the regional
Transcarpathian council,
Chernychko S.S., vicechancelor
of
the
Transcarpathian
Hungarian
Institute
named after F. Rakozi
II, Kantor Y.Y., and
director of secondary
school
of
Velykidobronsk of the
municipal district of
Uzhhorod.

The proposal to
take into account the
Hungarian language for
admission to higher
educational
establishment
was
considered
by
the
Ministry
and
the
Hungarian language was
included into the list of
admission examinations
at higher educational
establishments for 2012.
The higher education
institution can substitute
an exam in foreign
language for an exam in
Hungarian.

According to the
basic
curriculum,
educational plans include
two
components:
invariant and variable.
Invariant
component implies that
all the schools that
provide
secondary
education, follow the
same requirements for

164

general education of
pupils.
Variable
component is aimed at
ensuring
individual
oriented
educational
content.
the content of
invariant component is
determined by the State
standard for basic and
secondary
education,
approved by the Cabinet
of Ministers of Ukraine
of January 14, 2004 №
24.
Variable
component is formed by
the institution, taking
into account peculiarities
of the region, type of
institution,
individual
educational needs of
pupils.
Classhours of this
component
can
be
devoted to studying the
subjects
chosen
by
pupils, optional classes,
including the history and
culture of the Hungarian
people, etc.
These courses are
studied on the request of
pupils in schools of the
Transcarpathian region.
Besides,
individual events of the
Hungarian history are
studied in the course of
world history through
invariant component of
the curriculum.

165

The issue is under
the control of the
Ministry.

According
to
Article 53 of the
Constitution
of
Ukraine, citizens who
belong to national
minorities
are
guaranteed
in
accordance with the
law the right to receive
instruction in their
native language, or to
study
their
native
language in state and
communal educational
establishments
and
through
national
cultural societies.
Laws of Ukraine
"On Education", "On
General
Secondary
Education", "On local
self-government
in
Ukraine",
"On
property" and other
regulations determine
that the maintenance
and development of
material-technical base
of
educational
institutions are carried
out at the expense of

166

their
(owners).
to

systematically
provide
schools
with
textbooks in Hungarian on
each academic subject,
including private schools
and lyceums.

Provide funding of
teaching
invariant
component of the curriculum
from the state budget in
private general education
institutions.

founders

Budget Code of Ukraine
does
not
envisage
funding private schools
at the expense of the
state and local budgets.
The
Constitutional Court of
Ukraine has concluded
(decision of 04.03.2004
№ 5-rp/2004; case on
available and free
education), that the
state provides free
education
only
in
preschool
and
secondary
education
institutions of state and
municipal ownership.
In the schools of other
forms of property the
state
ensures
the
development
of
education
not
by
financing,
but
by
means of governance,
as defined by the
legislation
on
education.
By creating a
private
school,
the
founder is committed to
its maintenance, the
provision of appropriate
learning
environment,
providing
quality
educational
services,
health maintenance, food
for the pupils, etc.

The
authorities
have not received any
applications
from

167

parents. In case the
authorities receive a
sufficient number of
application, the issue
will be considered in
accordance with law.

The
authorities
have not received any
applications
from
parents. In case the
authorities receive a
sufficient number of
application, the issue
will be considered in
accordance with law.

to open education
institutions "school - preschool" with the Hungarian
language of education in the
city of Rakhiv, town. Yasin,
Velykyi
Bychkiv,
Kobyletska
Poliana
of
Rakhiv district if needed.

to open Hungarianlanguage group in the
Berehiv Lyceum № 11 and
in other vocational schools,
colleges, high schools and
colleges
of
the

168

Transcarpathian region.

05/18/2011
the city of
Berehove
the region of
Transcarpathia

To add disciplines
"Hungarian language and
literature" to the list of
exams to obtain philological
education at universities.

Representatives
of
the
Democratic
Union of Hungarians in
Ukraine
in
the
Transcarpathian region:
Medvid
S.V.,
first
deputy head of district
administration
of
Berehove, Braun A.O.,
Vice-Chairman of the
Berehove
District
Council

The proposal to
take into account the
Hungarian language for
admission to higher
educational
establishment
was
considered
by
the
Ministry
and
the
Hungarian language was
included into the list of
admission examinations
at higher educational
establishments for 2012.
The higher education
institution can substitute
an exam in foreign
language for an exam in
Hungarian.

The issue is under
consideration in the
Ministry.

To
establish
nationwide
students'
competitions
in
the
Hungarian language.

